it felt like life was meaningless I
would think to myself I hate this this
sucks I don't know what I want to do
with life anymore and that's sometimes
where the depression would kick in but I
didn't realize that the depression that
I was suffering from was untreated ADHD
depression and so I've learned rules now
for myself and for anyone out there if
you are suffering from this ask yourself
a few simple questions Mr Trevor Noah
the former host of The Daily Show he
gained a massive following for his
humorous yet incisive take on politics
and Society I was born to a black mother
and a white father in South Africa at a
time when it was illegal in the country
they were scared the police were going
to take me away and then my mother met
my stepfather and it became an unsafe
household your mother had been shot
point blank in the head by this man yeah
and from that day onwards Everything
Changes you arrive in America to pursue
your dream as being this comedian you
are very hardworking to say the least
which led to you being the host of The
Daily Show but it didn't go so well at
first it was absolutely terrible people
would just be like go back to where you
came from death threat it was really
hard but I persevered and I would get
home at 9:00 p.m. work until midnight
get back to the office at 7 the next day
and do it all over again and then The
Daily Show went on to become a smash hit
but was the cost of it I had made my
life about work and I had made
everything else secondary and to be
honest with you a lot of people are
doing this we've neglected connection
and I think we're experiencing a
generation of men in particular were not
just isolated but not practiced in the
art of connecting and it's affecting
Society now so those men that asked
struggling where do they need to start
this is a lesson that I've learned if
you're struggling with this so
you this has always blown my mind a
little bit 53% of you that listen to the
show regularly haven't yet subscribed to
the show so could I ask you for a favor
before we start if you like the show and
you like what we do here and you want to
support us the free simple way that you
can do just that is by hitting the
Subscribe button and my commitment to
you is if you do that then I'll do
everything in my power me and my team to
make sure that this show is better for
you every single week we'll listen to
your feedback we'll find the guest that
you want me to speak to and we'll
continue to do what we do thank you so
[Music]
much Trevor what are the most important
things that I need to understand about
your earliest years to understand the
man that sits in front of me
today well that's that's a tough one
because I I feel like my perception of
what the most important things are or
may not be the most important
things I could say it would be my sense
of humor and then it might be where the
sense of humor comes from which might be
my family or my country it might be
which schools I went to it might be
where I've lived or where I've traveled
to it's a yeah it's it's one of those
you know if you ever try to break down a
food or or something that you consume
and you go like what is the most
important ingredient what are the
ingredients that really make it what it
is it's like is it the crunch is it the
assd is it the salt is it the fat is it
what what what is it I I don't know I I
genuinely don't if I knew then I would
be able to either create more of me or
or um or maybe like you know figure out
which parts I want to tweak but I
honestly don't know the answer to that
question I often think of uh everyone
that I meet but also myself through the
context of like a I guess a similar
analogy like a set of ingredients that
came together that were then put into an
oven and like right the heat was turned
on and we were we were baked not to say
that we can't be changed after that
moment but um what are those
ingredients so my mother South African
and HOSA woman uh my father's Swiss from
Switzerland but was living in South
Africa so those are those are the the
parental ingredients you know my
grandmother I think is a key ingredient
because I spent a lot of time with her
as a young child uh my grandfather was a
crazy funny man was by polar but we
didn't know at the time I think we knew
towards the end of his life but it made
him wildly entertaining
um yeah it's it's it's an interesting
and tough one you know because I because
I often
think as much as we're baked to what
you're
saying I think that we're baked but then
we are very
much a product of the people that we
then come into contact with you know so
I think of most people sort of like a
like a sponge cake like most cakes are
very basic most of them and then what
really makes them special is what the
Baker does to them afterwards you know
but the fundamental cake is is is pretty
much the same and I think people are
like that yeah there's there's certain
things you know like you the color of
our skin and tone of voice and all of
that but then I think it's everyone we
come into contact with that gives us the
icing that gives us the the shape that
gives us the the dynamic texture that
makes us who we are you know and so I I
I strangely enough I feel like it's all
of these people that I was lucky enough
or unlucky enough to bump into that that
gave me a little bit of of of that
texture and shape and I think that's the
same for everyone you know that's that's
probably why I'm so um so conscious of
choosing my friends because I I
think that's me actively choosing the
people who are going to keep shaping me
as as I as I live my
life I've seen you on TV I've seen you
all over the place over the last 10
years of my life but I had no idea of
your early context I had no idea and
it's funny because sometimes you kind of
see I don't know Domino 35 in the all
these dominoes that fall but those early
dominoes I think often lead a lot of
Clues as to the Domino 35 that we see on
oh yeah yeah definitely definitely so
for someone that might not know your
earliest
context like I
didn't what do they what should they
know to understand you so I mean you
know first of all I was I was born and
raised in South Africa right um I was
born in 1984 so that was you know six
years before paride ended born to a
black mother and a white father at a
time when it was illegal in the country
um and it was strangely unique you know
I guess because it was illegal you know
so so I grew up in a world where I
didn't see many people like me who had
my background I I saw some people who
looked similar to me but they had a
completely different background you know
South Africa's racial Dynamics are very
complicated and sometimes throw people
off especially like internationally you
know um um but yeah that I think that's
that's one of the you know that's that's
the beginning of me and and then I I
think you know I look at these
ingredients which which aren't
necessarily the best in in in in
choosing your starting points but then
there would there was there was a series
of of Lucky breaks you know the dominoes
as you say there was a series of Lucky
breaks so one one of those was atite
ends you know so apte ends when I'm 6
years old and I I always think to myself
about how much that changes my entire
life because if if a parts side let's
say a parts side went for 10 more years
then now I'm 16 and I I haven't been
able to go to the schools that I went to
because you know only white kids were
allowed to go to them and and you know
children of color black children in
South Africa were restricted from going
to the same schools and weren't allowed
to live in certain areas and your your
whole life was defined by the color of
your skin in and and so that becomes
like one of the first dominoes that I
didn't have anything to do with that
changes my life people that are growing
up today aren't aware of what the
apartheid is no no no I've had to
research as an adult to make sure I know
what it is I was born in '92 so for
anyone that doesn't know what it's like
to be
a child that has a a white father and a
black mother growing up in apartheid
South Africa where as it says on the
front of your book you're considered a
crime yeah because your father and
mother have different skin colors what
does that environment feel like
emotionally for you so I was
lucky I was lucky in that I think at
least on the surface I didn't feel it
you know because one of the most
important things I've learned from my
upbringing is a child's reality for the
most part is defined and created by
their parents or their caregivers you
know so I I didn't know that my world
was strange I didn't know that my mother
wasn't legally allowed to have me um you
know when when to to to understand the
apoide system I always try to break it
down for people you know people think of
like racism and they go like oh okay
it's racism and I'm like no it's it's a
it's a it's a much more Insidious system
that was designed to oppress People
based on the color of their skin so
where America just said this black and
and whites and if you had like one drop
of blood that was black you were black
and it was a very simplistic system the
aparte system was a was a culmination of
all of the worst ideas from around the
world in an around race you know so the
The Architects of AP parites explored
what the Australians did with the
Aboriginal people um they they explored
what the Dutch did that's where the word
aparte comes from um they they looked at
what the Germans did you know during
during um the the the the rule of the
Nazis in in Germany like Nazi Germany
they looked at they looked at every type
of racism including in the US you know
they they it's it's crazy how much
effort they put into doing such a
terrible thing I often joke with my
friends and I go if they put that amount
of effort into making a great country
South Africa probably would have been
like one of the most powerful countries
in the world by now because there was a
lot of efforts and it it's it's a genius
system but just in the wrong direction
um so what that meant for me was I could
I could be born by by my mother you know
I could be the seed of my father but I
couldn't live with him we couldn't live
with him we couldn't live together he
couldn't live in our areas I could you
know technically speaking my mother my
father and myself weren't allowed to
live in the same area that's that's how
granular the system was so I was
considered Superior to my mother and
then my father was cons considered
Superior to me you know and so when I
was really young for instance I'm still
I'm still an indoor kid and I think a
lot of that is because when I was young
when I was with my grandmother for
instance and my mom was working my grand
would lock me in the house I couldn't go
outside and play with the other kids I
would Escape now and again she'd always
tell me stories about how I would like
dig a hole under the gate to go and to
go and play with other kids in the
street but she was terrified and I
thought it was just because she was
strict and she loved me but it was
because she was scared the the police
were going to take me away if they found
me running around in Soto which was a
Township where only black people were
supposed to be and so in the apartheid
system this skin color wasn't considered
black it didn't your culture didn't
matter all that mattered was your shade
and and that was instrumental in keeping
people keeping a majority as broken up
as possible to ensure that they were
oppressing many minorities as opposed to
one majority of people so it's it's
really complicated I mean and you know
you've read up on it but it's it's a
it's an infinitely complex system around
a a ridiculous idea so you weren't
allowed to be seen in public with your
mother no no no no not at all and you
weren't allowed to be seen in public
with your father no no my mom so when I
when I go out in public with my mom she
would she would I I don't even know
where she came up with this but she
would act like she was supposed to be
with me but not related to me you know
so she would um she would dress up as uh
you know everyone has different words
for these in different countries but
like nanny maid domestic worker and she
would just act like she's my caretaker
you know so it would look like my
parents I guess have hired her to look
after me and so that's how she'd move
seamlessly with me in the streets
because nobody would suspect it um
couldn't be with my father at all in
public that was that was just out of the
question a second ago you said you
didn't feel this environment or at least
you didn't feel these things to some
degree I I sat with a guy called Gabel
mate I don't know if you of course yeah
yeah and one of the things Gabel talked
to me about from his early childhood was
this moment when he was sh where because
his he was um Jewish his I believe he's
Jewish his mother had to give him up
just for a couple of days two or three
days because the the Nazis were going to
come and take her away so she thought to
save him I'll give him give him up it
turned out she was okay so she went back
and got him now he cites that moment of
trauma of losing his mother just for a
little while as being really pivotal to
his life but also in the development of
his ADHD right and a lot of his sort of
internalized shame and when he said that
to me I was quite shocked that even a
couple of days away from a parent a
subtle feeling of neglect at such such a
young age he cites as sort of putting
shame into his soul but also being
responsible for some of his ADHD in the
context that he thinks of ADHD as being
this thing where we learn because our
environment is so externally stressful
we start to avert our attention to to
other things sometimes now the reason I
say this is because it highlighted to me
the chance and the
probability that maybe we might not feel
it consciously but maybe subconsciously
at a deeper level these things shape us
in a way that's harder to spot I I
wouldn't disagree with that um I'm sure
I'm sure his instance was probably
harder if he a remembers it and then B
is separated from his mother MH you know
I I I'm not an expert in the field but I
I think your mom holds a very different
place in your life as a child you know I
I I think we're wired that way and then
I was lucky in that I was I was seeing
my dad does does that make sense so so
being in public with a parent is is is
not really something of consequence if
there isn't that in the world you know
and so when I when I think of like how
we shape realities I had no other
reality to compare it to so it's not
like I was seeing other kids thinking oh
wow I'm I'm left out there were many
other kids you know even when I talk
about my story I always say to people
don't think of this as a as a as a like
a unique and and special story it's just
that I happened to be in a place where
people talk to me about it but I am but
one story of many others I knew many
kids whose dads had been killed by the
police or had been arrested by their
aparts side police or had left into
Exile and so they couldn't be with their
dads for other reasons so I in a weird
way I used to think I was like the lucky
kid I I knew my dad you know my Dad
loved me and I I would see this man and
it was so like the the the feeling of
that I think at that age maybe wasn't
wasn't apparent for me I'm I'm sure I've
been more affected by things that
happened in my latter years because I
was more aware of them but as a child
I'm just having a good time I'm spending
time with my mom I'm never not seeing
her and if I'm not with her I'm with my
grandmother which is again normal you
know in many cultures all over the world
but there was never a moment where I I'm
I'm separated from this person because
of the system and she was brilliant to
figure out how to do that and so I
that's why I say I don't I don't
disagree with what you're saying but I
think everything affects us and
everything can be thought to affect us
negatively and positively and you know I
I've yet to meet a human being who's had
a perfect existence so I'm very careful
to then sort of like point to everything
as the reason for because everything is
already the reason for which does that
make sense sense yeah yeah your mother
and your father were they in love in
your view oh yeah definitely definitely
she eventually married someone else yeah
she eventually Mar she well she she was
never married to my dad so okay they
couldn't get married because of the laws
and then I think afterwards my mom was
just like well we we are where we are
and then I think there was a there was a
seminal moment in their lives you know
where she became very religious and my
dad was not at all and my mom was like
well I'm going down a religious path and
and so this is this is my new life you
know and he and he was called Abel yeah
that's that's my stepfather your
stepfather
yeah I read about the relationship your
mother had with him and it was uh it
seemed to be very complicated at times
violent relationship yeah yeah it really
was do do you understand what that means
at that
age it's you know it's it's tough it's
tough to process because I don't even
think
I fully know what it means at this age
you know like love um violence domestic
abuse these are things that I don't
think anyone fully comprehends even when
I talk to like therapists about it it's
always like a it's a theoretical
understanding it's not it's not a fact
it's like we think that this and this
could be because and this could cause
and therefore that could be you know and
and and we have Brilliant Minds who
think on what this does and how it
creates and you know but man I you know
I I I will never take for granted what
it was like you know for myself and for
any other kid who's experienced it
growing up in a home with there domestic
violence like it's it's one of the worst
things you experience
because you live in a world where your
parents are like the president in a
weird way you know when you're a child
your pres your your parents are the most
powerful beings you know in your head no
one is more powerful than them and if
you ever have the the you know the
terrible Fortune of seeing your parents
most most times your mother being in a
position where she's being violently
harmed I
mean it it rocks your fundamental
understanding of what the world is you
know
so for me I I mean that's something I
still deal with in therapy today you
know because I I'm I'm always trying to
chip away and trying to
understand what is still on me and and
what what is callous that I don't wish
to be and and then what is too soft or
what is like I'm always I'm always
trying to understand it because I I
don't think there's one concrete um
answer for what the experience does to
you is there anything still on you oh
definitely I think I think there always
will be you know
because you know I didn't see ever see
that in my home but I can only imagine
how much that would have exacerbated my
further um my early perception of what a
relationship and what love means to some
degree so so you see like my my
curiosity my question to you then is
like when you go you didn't experience
it I go but what did you experience and
this is this is the weird thing about
the mind right is I find whenever
whenever I speak to I mean like
brilliant thinkers and you know
the therapists and and you know
psychologists and all these people what
I find fascinating is is how sometimes
your traumas or your perception of your
traumas is is directly proportional to
what you lived in your in your life so
in a weird way you might have the exact
same experience that I have it's just
that mine might have been more physical
does that make sense 100% it's an
interpretation right it's it's I'm I'm
always fascinated by that like by how I
can connect with somebody
where in their house it was it was more
about like fighting and bickering and
people saying things to each other and
and shouting and I didn't grow up in
that kind of house but then I've met
people who did and we seem to be kindred
spirits because we've both both
experienced fundamentally an unsafe
household you know the the feeling of an
unsafe household and I think that's
something that that many adults are
still dealing with or not dealing with
but as a child I you know I don't think
we're sitting there with a little
notepad going well nothing physical
happened here and that was only words
and this was because of stress and no
we're just experiencing an unsafe
environment I only really learn about
myself um in this context through my
triggers as an adult and then kind of
matching the cards there's this game
where you like match the cards together
and go snap and it was you know me
pursuing a young lady the young lady
turning to me after me trying to get her
to date me for like 3 years and be like
let's be in a relationship and then the
feeling I got matched the feeling I had
when I was like six or seven and I
watched my mother screaming in my
father's face I was like and that
happened enough times me avoiding
romantic relationships oh that's
fascinating rejecting everyone the on
the minute of connection the minute
where we were about to form a
relationship rejecting oh this is that
feeling from my childhood they're the
same how did you how did you match them
because the way I would described the
feeling was impending prison time
time of my life I've seen like prison
time was watching my father sit there
passively as as screamed at and thinking
why doesn't this guy leave why does he
why is he why is he with her and so
that's kind of where I formed the
hypothesis and once I had something to
aim at I could resolve it and I resolved
it wow but I I don't know no that's
interest you see yeah on on my side it
was the other way around it's like I
think
you know I I think when I looked at how
I saw relationships and love in that way
it was like I I I never saw it as like a
prison but in a in a in a similar way I
think you know in a way that sort of
informed my avoidance it was it was more
me realizing I don't have an opportunity
or I'll never have an opportunity to
hurt you if I don't fully give to you
you know what I mean so it was a that
that's why I say we can be in the same
boat but realize we have we have
different tickets that brought us here
you know the the outcome is the same but
we sort of end up in the same place and
so in my world I'm without a doubt um
think that seeing a relationship where
somebody was hurt because they allowed
somebody into their lives affected my
ability to allow people into my lives
because I was like oh if if that happens
to me then what what happens are you a
prisoner like are you are you subject
and and and you grow up in a world where
people just don't seem to take it
seriously you know this is still a
problem in South Africa till this day I
mean this is a problem in many countries
around the world I was in uh where was I
recently I was in Amsterdam recently and
I saw they had this huge campaign around
femicide and gender based violence and
it's it's it's it's a problem all over
the world where people sort of don't
take it seriously you know they call it
a crime of passion you know a woman goes
to the police and says you know my
husband beat me and they go like oh but
what but what did you do this is between
you and your husband go home sort it out
figure the whole thing out and um I
think that definitely left me as a child
even though as a child looking at the
world going like oh wow okay so the
world thinks this is normal then you
know then that that means the world
won't keep me safe either does does that
make
sense you went through something that
again really really horrific and you got
a phone call one day that your mother
had been shot by this man yeah and he
she'd been been shot point blank in the
head by this man yeah how old were you
then 20s when this
happened let me think that no I was in
my I was closer to my 30s because my
younger brother was old enough is to
drive but shouldn't have been able to
drive so maybe he was like 14 so yeah
maybe I'm like 24 at the time somewhere
there 24 you get a phone call from him
your younger brother yeah saying mom's
been shot
what goes through your head in that
moment when you get a call like
that what went through my head was I
knew I knew exactly I knew exactly who
did it I knew what had happened I like
it's it's you know one of the
worst things that comes with growing up
in a in a house of domestic abuse and a
house where you're dealing with an
alcoholic is you become hyper sensitive
and you become really good at at predic
things you know
so I mean my friends know till this day
like I'll be the kind of person I'll
tell you when we should leave a party
before a fight breaks out I'm never
around for the fight because I can I can
feel it I can feel energy I can feel and
not like woo woo like no I just start
noticing people are not having as much
fun as they were 20 minutes ago and a
few of the guys are stepping on each
other and the ratio in the room has
gotten bad and the music's not
connecting with people I'll just I'll be
like it's time to leave you know and I I
think that from what I've understood in
in in you know in therapy and and
working with people who do the research
around this is children start to develop
an an acute sense it's like a spidey
sense you know you you hear the sound of
a car and you know which car is bringing
danger to the
house you know I would know by the
sounds of of the footsteps whether or
not my stepfather was sober or
drunk just by his footsteps I Knew by
the way he would close or open a door I
would know whether to be on edge or not
and
so when I got that call everything in me
let go like it was it was one of the
most still is it's like a painful memory
you know is is
like the first thought I had was damn it
it it happened I thought it would but
not like this but it it it happened
it happened
yeah what is the cost you know because
you described that spidey sense it
almost sounds like a gift and the
interesting thing to some degree it can
be a gift I think every gift is a curse
and I think every curse is a gift and
what is the curse that comes with the
gift so the curse that comes with it
is I exist in a space where I am too
aware of how other people feel you know
and and as I've come to understand it
what happens to a lot of children who
are in abusive households is they
develop their hyper sensitivity as a
tool to protect the parent because they
start in the same way you were saying
with your dad why is he just sitting
here what happens in in a household of
domestic abuse is a child goes oh my
parent does not know when danger is is
impending and so I then need to be on
alert for them because if if they don't
know then I need to be alert and if I'm
alert I can keep everybody safe and so
you you develop that acute sense you
develop you know your nervous system
doesn't doesn't rest I would sit in a
room and I would I could feel the people
and and I still have that I have to like
I now have to practice letting that go
and
so part of it is is probably why I'm a
good comedian but it's like it's like
learning when I want to use it and when
I don't so learning when to ignore it
did you have a choice yeah yeah you do
you definitely do you know I think
emotions you don't really have a choice
about your emotions most of the time but
you do you do choose how you react or or
how it affects you and so what I'll try
and do is genuinely sometimes I'll be
even in a conversation I I practice it
when it's low stakes I'll be with
friends and I can feel the conversation
getting heated and I can feel someone's
going to say something that'll hurt
somebody else and then what I'll
practice doing is just keeping quiet and
breathing whereas what I used to do was
I would jump in immediately I would jump
I would I would interrupt I interrupt
interrupt you know and I'll be like be
oh did you guys see the and I would
diffuse and I'd find a way and I was
very good at it I still am but now I'll
just breathe and I'll be like well let's
see where this goes I know my friends
are not going to hit each other but I
now breathe and go like it's not my job
to protect everybody um and so I just
try and breathe through the feeling and
see how it turns out sometimes I even do
it as a game to see if I am right
because sometimes you're predicting what
one of the outcomes and it may not be
the outcome you know and and I I then
trust that they can also resolve things
themselves and that's probably one of
the hardest things is as a
child because as you said you're not
understanding how your father's a
prisoner on this chair getting berated
and I as a child am going I don't
understand why my mother doesn't
understand the danger why doesn't she
leave and and why why is she even
getting into a conversation with this
man he's not
sober why is this happening many
children experience this and then you
you then go this person cannot protect
themselves so I have to do it for them
and how do did you try and do
that sometimes I would I would I would
just I just disrupt anything you know I
would I could disrupt a conversation I
could I could find a way to to you know
sort of like um distracting yeah you
know like like Chris Pratt with those
with those Raptors in Jurassic Park just
find a way to like Snap and you know
just pull
attention um find ways
to it it sounds ridiculous but literally
it was it was me just thinking of ways
you know do you close a door that then
has to be open that then alerts more
people to the presence of somebody or or
do you turn the TV up in this way or do
you say something to him so that he you
know his mood might shift in a certain
way do you you know all of all of these
things I I was I was thinking of and
this is me thinking of these things at
the age of let's say 9 10 11 12 you know
all the way through and does it ever go
the other way where you're also trying
to cheer up your mother at all or take
care of her spirits or no no
um I think my mother's my mother's gift
and and curse has always been the fact
that her religion has has powered her
through you know and if you know
somebody who's very religious you'll
know that their connection with God and
their purpose pushes them through you
know obstacles that most human beings
would never be able to survive never
never never so there was never like
despair on the other side that I could
feel from my mom I never felt like I had
to like cheer her up you know um the
house definitely descended into like a
like a doom and you you could feel there
was a there was a palpable sense of
tension post what had happened that day
you you presumably rushed to the
hospital yeah um you arrived there
you speak to doctors I imagine yeah did
you speak to him did you did you tell
the police about him did you call yeah
yeah yeah yeah I mean this is all
happening in the chaos and the Panic you
called him I don't remember if I called
him or if he called I I don't remember
how it happened did you speak to him
after this event
no
no and then you find out that there's
been a bit of a miracle I guess because
the the bullet has missed all of the
Fatal parts of that
I mean find out is a it's it's it's such
a
um it's such a drawn out feeling and
moment because you know time is weird in
that it stands still when you're
experiencing the worst of it and it it
flies when it's the best of its and so
that that moment it even when you say
the word you you to find out or go like
no that it what felt like forever was us
waiting for the inevitable news
that you know my mom our mom was dead
like that that seemed like the the
conclusion I mean I've watched movies
you've watched movies someone gets shot
in the head and it's over you know so
that was a yeah that that was me
grieving it's a very strange experience
to have
because I grieved
somebody I grieved the loss of my mother
but then she didn't die but I completely
grieved her as if she was gone like I I
genu I cried because she was gone I
didn't cry because she was hurt I didn't
I was like it's over it's finished every
thought ran through my head I was like
wow I'm raising my brothers now I was
like okay I guess now I'm the head of
the household it's amazing like my brain
spun in every day I was already now
thinking 10 years ahead I was like oh
man okay where where are we living what
are we doing how's this going to work
and you know where's my little brother
and what do I tell him and how do I you
know in that moment you you must you're
so interesting because you get to see
in the most horrific way the fragility
of the most important relationship of
your in your life to come out the other
side and realize how fragile that
because you know you talked about our
parents almost being these like
presidents you also live under the
assumption that they're always kind of
going to be there yeah and in that
moment you got to see that that's not
that's not guaranteed yeah and that
curse ended up being one of my greatest
gifts because from that day onwards I
have never seen my mother the same way
you know I I've
never like I I every time I look at her
I'm I'm grateful that she exists every
time I I hold her I like I hold her like
it's the last time I she even like
pushes me off sometimes like I I hug her
hard hug her hard and I hug her for long
and I think this is extended to other
people in my world to be honest with you
is I I I'm very cognizant of the fact
that this thing is is ephemeral I don't
know when it'll when it'll disappear so
it has made me more appreciative of that
I don't assume you know I I I hope and I
think there's a possibility that we will
meet again you know what does they say
in Arabic
inshallah God willing I I don't know and
it was a bit of a miracle I was reading
because you're right yeah no it was in
movies you hear someone get shots in
shot in the head you never hear that
they survive a bullet to their head yeah
whereas in your mother's case she
survived it by
some yeah that that's where we have to
go miracle and that's where we we still
joke till this day you know because
because my mom's very religious I grew
up very religious but very skeptical of
of religion or anything really and I was
taught to question ironically by my
mother you know my mother taught me to
question um she still questions things
she doesn't she doesn't like follow
blindly so so I think
I I was I was in this position and I
think many of us were
where I'm I'm seeing what I think is is
is the end the doctors are saying to me
we we're going to try what we can but it
looks terrible and then we find out that
the bullet entered the back of her skull
went through her head and then exited it
like it it shattered it went it
basically missed the bottom of the brain
mhm you know went went past the
um you know the spinal cord all the way
through and then hit her cheek bone
which then deflected the bullet and then
went out of her nose so it like cut off
a little piece of her nose but the exit
wound wasn't as bad as it could have
been and yeah and they the doctors
couldn't do anything so there was no
brain surgery there was no opening of it
it was just stopping bleeding closing
wounds and now
praying and and the doctor was the one
who said miracle and he he said I he
said I hate this word because I'm a man
of science and I'm I'm a doctor he said
but the this was a miracle said this
shouldn't have happened like this and
then my mom was like yeah of course of
course it's a miracle and of course this
is how it was going to happen she like
you know my my Lord protects me
so he didn't go to prison no no I
didn't H how how does how does that so
in South Africa um I don't think it's
Unique to South Africa as well you know
I've when I've traveled to other African
countries I've I've learned this is
unfortunately
true the crime that a man commits
against his wife or his partner isn't
given the same validity as if it were
committed against a
stranger you know the court system
doesn't treat it the same the the law is
somehow not applied with with the same
level of ferocity as if it were somebody
else and so in this instance you know
they they basically ruled something to
the effect of like oh it was his first
offense and uh you know would he repeat
it or not and it was but it just it was
it's it's a failing of the justice
system that has meant that many women in
South Africa and other parts of the
world don't feel like justice gets
served you know you you see it time and
time again um you see it in the US all
the time unfortunately you know you'll
see man kills wife or wife and family
and themselves
possibly and the case just isn't treated
with the same it's always seen as like
there like a oh ah that something went
wrong or in a in you know in a tragic
love affair it's it's always it's always
labeled like that and I think that's
affected our ability in society to
um yeah I think to treat it the way we
should when you described the miracle
that that bullet traveled from the back
of your mother's head through through
her her head and then out her nose it
made me think about what we said at the
start of the conversation about dominoes
and how tight in this case millimeters
change the course of your life because
as you say the responsibilities you
would have then had to assume you see
the life you would Everything Changes by
millimeters yeah everything changes I
probably don't move to America I don't
explore the world in the same way I I
take on a whole different role in my
life it everything changes
what about anger towards him towards
Abel oh geez that yeah that's that's
been a tough one for me because I I
because I experienced every emotion you
know I I talk about it in my book like I
I've experienced every emotion because I
mean fear was the first
one the idea that this person could take
away you know the life of of someone who
arguably I loveed the
most
um then like rage helplessness um
even even like shame feeling like I
didn't protect her like I because I knew
from the beginning you know I IAL
literally IAL WR writes about this in
the book my grandmother would tell us
stories of how cuz she had the best
memory in the family she would tell us
stories of how when I was young when my
mom first met my stepdad she like I was
I was saying to the family I was like
this guy's great and everything but I
don't think this is a good idea I don't
think he's a good man I don't think we
should trust him I like I was saying
this as a child
you know and and the the one thing that
I think confuses people sometime
sometimes when it comes to domestic
abuse is that we we think of it as a
binary you know so people go like how
can these bad men live these lives but
they don't we don't realize
that often times the moment of bad is a
is a you know is is the the
explosion but everything around it is
charisma and charm and and and jokes and
you know and I laughed with this man
most of my life you know had some of my
favorite experiences with him as a human
being when he was wonderful he was the
most wonderful human being you'd ever
meet and it it took me a while to to
understand how
to um how to consolidate those ideas how
how to you know how to resolve the fact
that somebody who you love someone who
treated you with with with with respect
and and joy in in some moments
was also the person who brought you the
most pain you know um so I definitely
anger was like a big one for me I I I I
thought everything anger at myself anger
at my mom for for staying to to the
point that that could happen anger at
him anger at the system for not
protecting anger just like just
everywhere and then anger dipping into
pain and anguish and then you know
crying it out and then being angry again
and then being scared and then just just
going through waves and waves and waves
of that um and so that that was a lot of
my time in
therapy and a lot of my time having
conversations with my mom you know and
my mom would always always say to me
she'd be like you know over time you
learn to forgive and I was like I don't
think I could ever forgive and she was
like yeah she's like but you know
forgiving doesn't mean
forgetting it means letting go of the
thing that the person is holding of you
as opposed to you know you it's not you
letting them into your life it's not
it's just going like yeah that happened
I feel for them I understand many of the
things that made them do what they did
and then trying to let go of that that
that anger that's like burning inside
you that rage um and I'm glad my mom did
that because in the years since I've you
know I've spent more time reading about
domestic abuse and learning about
domestic abuse and speaking to experts
about it but unfortunately there's
there's a reason there's the Vicious
Cycle you know a lot of young boys who
grow up in homes where their moms are
abused grow up to then become abusers
themselves even though they hated the
very idea of what they were
experiencing um and so I to your point I
think it's because of that now un
unreleased and unrealized anger that
they didn't get to express when they
were children because they weren't safe
and and then now at some point it comes
out of them and so I I I genuinely had
to deal with that I had to even accept
the idea that I was as angry as I was
angry and helpless which is a Terri
combination for a human being to
experience have you forgiven him I think
in moments yes I think I I have I think
the the the levels of my forgiveness
won't reach my mom's because she was in
love with him you know to me this was
still a person who came into my life you
know he's not my biological father so I
think my I don't think I I've ever
reached like the level of like pure like
I forgive you but I do understand you
know I think I understand a lot of it um
I think I I think I feel sorry for him I
think I
um yeah I've learned to come to terms
with it but like pure forgiveness I'd be
lying to you if I'm like yeah I've
forgiven I'm like no I I think so
sometimes and then other times I go like
no actually actually I don't that
experience has left fingerprints on you
in some way oh definitely and how do
those fingerprints still show up today
in your day-to-day life in your
profession
oh I I wouldn't I wouldn't know the
answer to that
question
because because the strange thing again
I think about the mind is
that the things that affect
us sometimes may not be the things that
are as obvious to us as we may
think you
know you can get into a car
accident and experience an Ute trauma
that you and you know how this affects
you and you'll be shocked that many of
the other things you're dealing with in
your life where you're struggling aren't
actually from that car accident they're
from like the minute moments in your
life where somebody rejected you um you
know you weren't chosen to play on on a
team as a kid um you failed a test you
you were bullied you and and I I don't
say this like dismissively I I say it
cautiously I go like oh I I I I would be
careful to put all of it on that moment
because in in a weird way that moment
moment was contained MH you know it came
with many other other instances but but
yeah as I've sat and explored my my
myself and my brain and my my mind in
therapy I've realized that some of the
things that you think will affect you
the most might not they might stay in
that in that world and then there's all
these other things that affect you way
more than than you would ever think they
even have the right to so I I wouldn't
know to be honest with you I wouldn't be
able to say to you oh I'm like this
because of that or I'm like that because
of that no I do think appreciate people
more you know I um I'm I'm very present
when I'm with my loved
ones
um yeah but other than that I I I
couldn't give you a concrete answer that
would be that would be genuine you said
something about young men struggling
which is um came to mind as you're
talking about you being that young man
who seemed to be quite confused with a a
variety of emotions and
um less experience about what the
correct Outlets were for those emotions
you said recently in fact one of the big
things I've been worried about recently
is young men and how angry they've
become how alone they've become how
isolated they've become and then
ironically how they've turned the anger
isolation into a community there's a
couple of words there that seemed to fit
the shoe that would go on your foot
anger
isolation um as a Young
Man
loneliness C can you relate to to what
young men are going through in the sort
of modern world today because the stats
on young men is are quite shocking yeah
this the mental health stats the suicide
suicidality stats the depression stats
the stats around
purposelessness and I wondered to know
how you're looking at young men today I
get asked all the time by people that
listen to the show they say they've got
a young son and the Sun is struggling
they don't know who they are where they
belong with their purposes how to make
friends is a big
one how what what are you seeing when
you look out into the world the state of
young men so
I think I can empathize with a lot of it
and I think I can relate to some of it
but on my side you know other than the
anger let's say I wasn't isolated I
didn't feel isolated at all I because
because I got to play with other kids
and because I was with other kids and
because I had my cousins and everybody I
never felt isolated you know so even
when I was talking to you about my
grandmother I think you used isolated
but I didn't because I genuinely never
perceived it as that because I was in
the home with people it's just they were
Granny's so do you get what I'm saying
so I didn't feel like isolated in that
way um definitely felt like an outsider
though which is a different feeling
that's adjacent I think it occupies the
same lexical field but it isn't isn't
the exact same thing you know because
isolation I think can come with it like
a a certain Solitude and and certain you
know a feeling of like knowing that you
are in this thing alone because you are
in this thing alone but then being an
outside is a different you know it's
it's a different type of torture and I
think that's maybe what a lot of men are
experiencing that I can relate to I
think for a long time we've lived in a
world where we've told people what
they're supposed to do how they're
supposed to do it and it was sort of
easily realized right and now I'm not
I'm not a I'm not a historian I don't
know every you know history that we've
gone through but from the little that
I've read and and from from the the
historians that I have spoken into you
know Society goes in these waves and we
move through these waves and I think we
shouldn't take for granted now that
there was a whole generation of young
men who were given a purpose by War a
lot of war and war is one of the most
powerful thrusts of purpose that a
nation will ever experience young men
are told what they're supposed to be
doing your country needs you you need to
go and fight young man you need to
protect this country and you're like I
need to protect this country now even if
you don't want to dodge the draft you've
been given a a purpose in a strange way
even if you you're like I'm anti-war now
you have a purpose your purpose is to be
against the war your purpose is to
oppose the war your purpose is to spread
love and peace the other person's
purpose is to survive the war another
person's purpose is to win at the war
but you have a purpose and that purpose
is powerful and it propels Nations
forward you know and then you enter into
a period of what we would argue is
relative peace and I say relative
because there are many parts of the
world where there're just like these
constant chronic Wars that are waging
but for most people what are you what
are you doing you know you're sitting in
a world where there is no draft and
there there is no imminent warn it's
it's a choice now do you want to go to
the military or do you not and you don't
have to and and then
also things aren't just given to you you
know you before when your parents were
like go get a job it meant there was a
job to
get you know if your parents like go get
a job you you you you could it was
almost harder to not get job back in the
day than it is now in a strange way
because like it was just like this thing
you do you know it was doing I sweep I
clean I you know I collect I fix I it
was it was so simple and I think now
we're living in a world where many young
men are are are
experiencing a
purposelessness because it's sort of
like not laid out in any way shape or
form and I think we've created such a
narrow a narrow scope of what people can
do or can't do or you know like we've
rewarded so few things that I think
we've we've exacerbated the problem you
know gone all the times when being a
painter a philosopher a you know some
sort of artism is like celebrated in
that way you know gone on the days where
skills are passed down from generation
to generation and it it seems like that
that's that's less and less becoming a
thing and I from from from what I've
been told a lot of it can be tracked
back to like industrialization and this
consolidation of of um
manufacturing you know so an interesting
point of this you were talking was is
because more women now are graduating
with college degrees and because of the
equality movement that's that men and
women now are both in the workforce at
high level
positions I mean even in that there's
going to be less jobs available for
those men who would clearly before in
the past have much yeah and also this is
really interesting thing that lady was
talking to about my podcast where she
said that um there's still a stigma in
society that a man is to be the provider
yes but in a world where they're less
able to get those top jobs to provide
and women are earning more which no
one's got an issue with at all um there
no one not no one yeah yeah some people
have an issue with that that's true yes
I don't have an issue I don't think you
do but um but it they were referring to
it as the you could say the short man
problem or the T tall girl problem huh
effectively they were saying that women
want to date up and to the right which
has been shown in the surveys but
there's less people up to the right now
and so and there was another survey that
said 70 or 80% of women want their
husband to be a provider but math the
math doesn't math here because there
isn't that many men up there anymore so
and when you look at the dating stats
the sex stats the age in which men lose
their virginity now the amount of men
that haven't had sex in the last year it
effectively looks like just the top 10%
of men are having all the fun and the
50% have been right disenfranchised by
the system yeah but I so I I I I think
about this all the time and I you know I
I try and spend as much time reading
thinking and discussing with people who
are far more brilliant than I'll ever be
and what I've come to realize is we may
now be
experiencing a culmination of The
Dominoes you know we're experiencing The
Dominoes of a declining middle class and
govern around the world no longer
propping up the middle class because
anyone who's real about economics knows
that like the middle class is an
invented thing really and it's
governments actively saying we're going
to create it right so as that has
declined over time and people have sort
of created this illusion that no
everyone can just get there on their own
Merit and like nothing needs to be
created for you we've seen the middle
class decline what happens then is
there's a gap you know between the rich
and the poor then there's another Domino
that falls and it's like the
consolidation of wealth you know these
Mega corporations around the world that
find ways to not pay taxes that find
ways to pay like slave wages to some
people and then sell you a cheap product
and then give you credit that you
shouldn't get and then put you in a debt
cycle that you shouldn't be in and
that's one Domino you know and then
politics becomes more polarized and more
extreme because of algorithms and the
way we say that's another Domino that's
another Domino that's another Domino
that's another Domino companies find
ways as you said to hire fewer people to
get more out of them or hire different
people that's another Domino and and in
a strange way I I think of this
sometimes I go you see gifts and
curses this is purely anecdotal in my
life it's not research but I'm I'm
willing to bet on this and I'm willing
to stand by it one of the
curses that women experience because of
being pushed out of the workplace and
being like forced to stay at home and
for such a long time was they learned
how to find
purpose in what most people would
consider mundane and maybe even
meaningless you know women have found
ways to like fill their time with
community and with connecting and they
found ways to like look after their
bodies and and work out and do things
and it's different in different
communities like knitting clubs book
clubs and just just think about that
it's like it takes up your time it gives
you a purpose we're going to read this
book and then we're going to discuss it
and we I mean fundamentally it's nothing
but it's something you know and it
drives you forward it makes you feel
like you're supposed to be somewhere
you're supposed to doing you're supposed
to be doing
something and then when the workplace
opened up the women are like oh we can
go and work as well and you know I don't
know about you but in school all the
girls were smarter than we were in class
anyway and so now they're they're
comfortably working especially in an
office environment which sort of like
designed perfectly for them in that in
that way and then guys I think we
haven't practiced that I don't know many
guys I don't know about you I don't know
about I don't know many guys who know
how to just sit with their male friends
and just be not do a thing be like just
be and I and I find and I you know I'll
be careful in saying this but I have
found that it the the the degree of
comfort in just being is is different
depending on where you're from in the
world so like my friends who are from
third world countries developing nations
you know whether it's South Africa and
we're in the township or whether it's my
friends from Trinidad or it's my like in
Trin they even have a word for it liming
they say they say let's lime and lyming
means spending together with no purpose
whatsoever that's literally what my
triny friends said they're like yo we're
going to lime on Saturday that means
we're doing nothing it doesn't mean
we're going to go see a game it doesn't
mean we're going to watch your we're
going to Lime it means your friend is
going to come they're going to sit on
the couch and you're just going to be
you'll talk and then you won't talk and
then you laugh and then you won't laugh
and I don't know about you but I I feel
like guys are we're not as good at that
you know like I I I read something the
other day that was great and it was
talking about how guys always need the
third thing there's always the third
thing there's you there's me and there's
the third thing hey what are you doing
on Saturday um why don't we uh you want
to go fishing it's like why why do we
need the fishing why can't we just sit
like this and be like hey what's what's
happening in your heart Stephen what's
what's going on what's happening in my
heart or let me tell you about what's
going on women can do that and some may
argue that it's you know maybe they've
been genetically coded but I also think
they've been forced to practice that
because men were like you can't come to
the you know the factory the office the
everything for so long long and then
women are like all right and I think I
think that's another thing that men are
struggling with but it's not like their
fault it's the Dominos when I was young
we used to go to the mall we us to go to
the mall and we'd hang out with other
kids and then now malls aren't really a
thing and then kids don't really hang
out anywhere and everything's become
about money and transactions think about
how few places you can go to connect
with people without money now you know
what I mean but when I was growing up it
was it was quite common you just went
and you hung out with other kids kids
and that was just what you did it didn't
involve money and I think I think we're
starting to experience that Domino
affecting Society now do you have money
for a video game console no oh then you
can't meet up with your friends on
fortnite you know do you have money to
to go to a mov no you don't or and
movies have gone up yeah you you can't
hang out with your friends at the movies
can you afford an Uber ride no you can't
can you all these things now have meant
that I think we're experiencing
generation of men in particular who are
not just isolated but not practiced in
the art of just like connecting with
another another male for no other
purpose than to just like share hearts
and and be human beings I've heard you
talk about how you think where're a sort
of continuation of our ancestors and
their sort of legacy is that kind of you
heard you talk about this before and as
you were saying about this idea that
women are able to um connect without the
third thing it made me think you know I
think a lot of women have had that
modeled by another the generation that
came before them whereas I don't know
about you but I didn't have that modeled
in my I never saw my dad sit with a guy
and that's what I mean he didn't even
talk to us like we didn't even have
those conversations I call him by his
first name yes and I mean he would even
he's like an awkward hugger you know
like a guy you might get get the [__]
off me but we we don't have that modeled
so where do we learn the skill yeah and
you'd be weird if you said to your
friend well most people be weird if they
said we just want to sit down and just
what's in your heart yeah to be like
what's wrong with you yeah my my friends
treat me like that I still do that now I
think they've softened to it you know my
friends have sort of
um they indulge
me um and I think they enjoy it for the
most part but like I I do that with my
guy friends just be like man let's just
take a moment does it come naturally to
you just look into my eyes and let's
just take a moment well here's the thing
funny enough I spent most of my life
with
women so I spend most of my time my mom
with my grandmother with my grandmother
and my grandmother's friends because I
was in the house with them I'm just
sitting around with these women just
like talking and sharing I spent very
little time with like the the men in
that way so those men that are
struggling they they'll probably be
hearing you and thinking that you're so
far away from them in terms of that
ability to be emotionally expressive and
just to check in for a lot of them it's
uncomfortable yeah um what is it they
need like where do they need to start is
there a place to start I think it is
difficult but I also think we have tools
to make it easy you know
so I'm I'm I'm very hesitant to very
quickly just say to every man hey go out
there and be vulnerable and whatever
because the the sad truth is a lot of
guys have punished a lot of guys for
being vulnerable and being themselves
and we have to acknowledge that as well
you know there's so many times when a
guy will go to their friends and say man
I'm sad people like sad oh what are you
[__] oh look at the guy sad what do you
me she broke up with you come on get out
there man
and now all of a sudden the circle that
you had that you thought was protecting
you has revealed to you that if you show
your vulnerability you're ostracized
from it it's not safe yeah so you don't
want to be there and then sometimes it
even turn into a fight you know now all
of a sudden people are slapping you or
hitting you or punching you because
you've admitted that You're vulnerable
and so I I think I think that's another
place where young men struggle is like
we have to maintain this bravado and
then we see all these these influences
online who keep telling us like yeah
you're a tough guy that's all you got
you got to be a tough man you got to be
a tough man that's what you got to do
never once are they saying to you like
yo what do you feel how do you get rid
of those feelings or how do you deal
with them how do you process them who's
your friend that you can like literally
sit with and cry with do you have one
but I do think we have tools you know I
I think again you know gifts and curses
the curse of the online world is that it
affords everybody anonymity and so they
can be the worst of themselves I think
the gift is also the
anonymity you know I think a lot of
people will be shocked at how
you can connect to a person online in
like a really honest and beautiful way
because you you you're safer in a way
you know I I've I've made some of my
best friends playing like war zone you
know when like when the pandemic hits I
was like God everyone was playing war
zone I was like I'll jump on I'm not
really like an FPS guy and I jumped on
and I was decent at it but I made
friends playing this game and would talk
to people and you'd regularly meet with
them and some people were [__] but a
lot of them weren't and the ones who
weren't I would relink up with and we'd
play and then it goes from talking about
the game and talking about your loadouts
and then all of a sudden you're talking
about your family and your life and how
are things and how's your week been and
how's work been and what's going on with
your boss and that promotion and that
and to this day one of my friends one of
my closest friends a person who are like
considered like a brother to me is from
that video game I never knew what he
looked like all I knew was what he
sounded like and we we like know each
other because we we explore a world that
was full intents and purposes fake and
yet the most real experience that that
that that we could have and I think you
know I look at like Reddit for instance
I think Reddit is one of the most
beautiful communities I've ever seen
where a guy can get on reddits you can
write a post and you can say anything
you can say I'm struggling with this I'm
having suicidal thoughts I feel like I
don't have a purpose I feel and you'll
be shocked at how many other guys will
jump on and go hey man I'm in the same
boat hey I'm also struggling I I'm also
sad I I also my parents I don't have a
good relationship with them I you'll be
shocked at how that Community comes
around you because there is the safety
of knowing that you're not exposing like
your name and your face but you are
exposing the thing that's inside you and
so is it a shame that we can't do that
in person as well oh yeah definitely I
think it's it's the biggest thing that's
limiting men you know I think it truly
is it's one of the biggest thing that's
limiting men in society is that we don't
we don't have an outlet for our emotions
we don't you know so if we if we're not
fighting or competing then we're just
bottling it comes with a cost doesn't it
if you bottle things yeah yeah it does
it never really stays inside the bottle
it's like the bottle's got a hole in it
or something yeah exactly you said
something I really related to which is
you said you didn't feel like you
belonged when you're younger and I
wondered when I was reading you you say
this in your books and in other
interviews you've done if that was at
all related to your skin color I'm
assuming it was in part but um I I grew
up with the exact same feeling like
there's there's a reason why I don't
know anybody
from my hometown where I lived for
almost until I was 18 years old wow
because I just always felt like we were
different we were all we were always
different everyone's white We're the
black poor family and Al we just talked
different I had different ideas of the
world and dreams and um but even now I
still don't feel like I I belong I was
with so where do you feel like you most
belong then no like almost nowhere no
but where do you most belong there's got
to be a place where you feel like you
most belong well I'm alone oh oh wow
that's when I feel like I'm that's when
you can truly be whatever the [__] you
want to
be maybe yeah maybe when I'm alone I
guess that's when you feel like you you
most belong okay let's take it away from
alone I'm saying with other people or
even in a place is there a city you go
to is there a group that you're amongst
is it you're telling me there's no way
that you go to where you think to
yourself wow I I belong here I
definitely not a city um I'd say maybe
when I'm with my brothers
at
Christmas um just because they also
didn't really fit anywhere so we kind of
all don't you know and they kind of I
think that's the only thing but there's
a lot of people that don't feel like
they belong and they're trying to find
their place in the world you were a kid
from South Africa that didn't feel like
he
belonged have you found your place in
the world so I haven't I haven't I I
just find places and moments where I
feel comfortable and and and and I feel
like I'm yeah I feel warm is the best
way to describe it and and this is a
lesson that I've learned actually if if
you're struggling with this it may not
apply to everybody but I think it can
help
sometimes the feeling of being alone is
exacerbated by the fact that you are
trying to connect with people based only
on you and yourself you know so you go
I'm alone I don't feel like I belong and
then you want to go meet somebody and
you and you're just like I hello I'm
me do I do I belong to you do you belong
to me and they're like what who are you
what are you doing here you're weird
like you and we we we don't know how to
belong and how but what I found works
wonders is finding things you enjoy
focus on finding things you enjoy like
like things that you like doing MH
activities and I mean anything running
um playing a sport uh reading like any
activity with your hands you fishing
fishing find it find the thing that you
love find it I want to really I want to
show you some um some graphs that I was
I was just thinking of um as you were
speaking I'll put them on the screen for
anyone to look at but have you seen
these grass before have you seen those
graphs before people keep us oh yeah
I've seen I've seen something similar to
this
yes in terms of our age and then who
we're with in our lives yeah and I was
particularly looking at the friend graph
there yeah so the amount of time you'll
spend with different people as you age
and it when I first saw this it was
really really shocking to me and
actually this graph changed my life a
lot because it made me realize that if I
if I don't do anything the sort of five
best friends that I have yes will drift
away from me yeah and I I I saw this in
your story that your relationship with
friendship and connection has evolved
over time yeah what has that Journey
been like if you take me back from when
you left South Africa you you arrive in
America to pursue your dream as being
this
comedian how did your priorities shift
as it relates to friendship and
connection
I think because I spent so much time
alone as a kid I loved other people you
know what I mean I loved being alone I
love spending time by myself but man I I
when I can dig a hole under that gate
and like connect with other kids I'm in
heaven
and when I when I became a young adult
and I and I was and I was starting to
work I really appreciated the people who
would come into my life and what they
would teach me and you know what what
what they would remind me of myself
which is like an important thing to me I
think I think fundamentally that's what
great friendship is is somebody who sees
a part of you that you wish to grow more
of and then every time you're meeting
with them they're encouraging it and
they're they're reminding you of it you
know and that's why I warn people about
bad friends because a bad friend can do
the same thing you know
like if I say to you like think of think
of the kid who bullied you in school
think of that kid who was really mean to
you yeah I bet you if you met them to I
don't care how successful you are on
this podcast there's a little bit of
that kid that got bullied that they
still have oh 100% you know what I mean
100% like this there you go and Where I
Stood when he called me the N word
exactly exactly and it's amazing how
that happens to us but it's because they
they they hold us in a moment you know
and some people hold you in a negative
moment and some people hold you in a
positive moment there are some friends I
can think of where no matter what is
happening in my life if I meet them I'm
smiling I'm thinking I'm being creative
I'm laughing I'm loving I'm sharing I'm
feeling I'm I can't control it you know
it's not something that I'm actively
trying to do because they are constantly
seeing that part of me that I wish to
encourage and so how do you define a bad
friend like how do you know how do you
spot one I don't think you spot them I
think you feel it you know and I think
it's a lot easier for us to spot than we
think it is one of the easiest ones is
can you be yourself you know sometimes
they're not a bad friend they're a bad
friend for you because you are not
revealing yourself to them and so they
are being friends with the idea of you
but they're not being friends with you
and then you leave thinking I don't feel
good but they don't even know you so you
can't blame them for being a bad friend
you know I I almost don't think there's
such a thing as a bad friend I think
you're just in a bad
friendship you know you you because they
could be a great friend to somebody else
so I wouldn't even Define them as being
a good or bad friend I just go this is a
bad friendship for you MH and what I
learned very early on was like the value
good friendships you know and I I
learned because of my mom I remember
once I was um this was I was 1920 I just
finished high school so I was yeah I was
and just finished high school and I
spent all my time hanging out with like
friends of mine in in the hood you know
and that's we just did nothing the whole
day we got up to mischief and we like
how do we make money how do we hustle
how do we do these things and then my
cousin went to
University and then I because his
university like had this like open-ish
policy you could just hang out on campus
all day and so I started hanging out
with him on campus pretty much the whole
day when he wasn't in
lectures and then I I went home one day
and my mom was beaming you know I walked
in with my cousin and my mom was like oh
how are you boy and she's so happy and
she's like oh nice to see you and and
she said oh I'm so happy I'm so happy
that you guys are spending this time
together and I said why are you so happy
and my mom said because you you spend
all your time at at the University and I
said to my mom I was like Mom I don't go
to university I just hang around and I
do nothing and she said yes but the
people you are hanging around and doing
nothing with will inspire you to do more
with your life because they're doing
something with it and I was like what
and she said to me she was like you
cannot be around people who are moving
and not wish to
move whether we like it or not the
people around us are affecting how we
see ourselves and how we wish to be seen
and that stuck with me I don't think I
took it immediately but it definitely
stuck in my brain and the friends that I
have today are still I have new friends
you know as I grow in life but the
friends that I have today my core group
of friends you'll see them with me at
the Grammys you'll see them sometimes
like when i' be like you know backstage
at The Daily Show you'll see them with
me at random events in the world you'll
see them backstage at my comedy shows
you these people have literally been
with me on a journey where they've got
their own lives
but our Journeys have been intertwined
because they always make me want to be
more and do more and grow more and
change and and I think I do the same
thing for them and we're constantly
challenging each other and and
encouraging each other and playing with
each other and and and that that has
been I mean that's been immeasurable for
me you know that that's I even value
that more than I do like let's say
success on the subject of success
friendship sacrifice the moment when you
come to the United States um you are
very hardworking to say the least in
fact when we sat down you know you've
flown from Portugal to where was it
Seattle Seattle to Vegas yeah then here
to New York in the last couple of days
or say yeah it's four days I think in to
yeah yeah four
days you don't have to do that you don't
have to do that I mean you don't I mean
I don't know what's in your bank account
but I would haard a guess that you don't
need the money so I often wonder what is
it that's driving you today someone said
to me the other day on the podcast they
said they referred to my driving force
in my life as potentially being toxic
Fuel and I've never had the phrase toxic
fuel before but the definition of that
is this sort of combination
of seemingly negative forces that pushes
you to to prove something whether it's
to yourself or to others or okay and Sh
shame is a big part of that you see it a
lot I think with first generation
immigrants when they come to a country
they they know what it's like to be
without so they're driven by this toxic
fuel how does that land with you and it
can you relate to any of that at all I
can but I don't think that's been my
case
um if you spoke to me 3 four years ago
and you said Trevor you went to Portugal
you went to Seattle you went to Vegas
and now you're in New York and it would
be yes because I went to work here I
went to work here I went to work there
and I went to work there you know now I
was in Portugal with my friends that's
why I was in Portugal you know I was in
Seattle because I was working I work
with Microsoft but it's like on it's
like a passion project you know I get to
work on Tech I get to explore technology
and ideas and work with engineers and
you know just enhance my mind and then I
was in Vegas doing work and then in New
York I'm having a conversation with you
but this is not like in a work world so
I go like oh I'm going to have a great
conversation with you and I also love
being in New York cuz my friends are
here and this is technically where I
live
so like if you if you said to me let's
do this interview not in New York I
would have said
no but because you chose a city where my
friends are I can I'll say yes to you
and it didn't used to be the case so now
I have made one of the like determining
factors of how I live my life I think of
it through the lens of friends first
because I think that Community is
literally the most important thing in
everybody's life not just my life
everybody's life I some people be like
my family I'm like hey you think that
and it is true but as you said on the
grph you'll see at some point you're
going to get old and your kids are going
to go off and live their own lives and
do their own thing and then you're going
to be shocked at how it's you and your
spouse if you're lucky and you all of a
sudden you're alone and you're like
where are all my friends where are all
these people but friendships are you
know they're they're little piggy banks
you're putting money in and they're
putting money in yours and every now and
again you get to break them open and
enjoy what's inside but that's the most
important thing that's that's how that's
my like literally That's My Success now
now yeah that's my success
now
before it was just because I loved
solving any puzzle that somebody would
put in front of
me that's all that drove me and that's
that's a lot of what still drives me now
I just love puzzles and what was the
puzzle that brought you to America oh so
the puzzle was can somebody host The
Daily Show when they're like not from
America
and you know it's like just all these
things can can you even do it can you go
host a show in America like well this is
a crazy puzzle seems impossible so let's
try it was money or fame or anything
part of that cuz Fame is often associate
with a form of like validation no no no
that's the curse of what I do I often
say to people I you know I I'm unlucky
that a part of my job comes with Fame I
don't like that part of my job why
because I I don't need it nor do I want
it what's the cost of it the curse oh I
mean you I'm sure you're starting to
experience exper this in many ways in
your life but like
it's people will never
appreciate the
Beauty and
the and and the Tranquility that comes
with
anonymity the the ability to write your
story whenever you meet someone you know
when when you meet a stranger let's say
you're at a bar at a restaurant in a
train station wherever you can look at
somebody and you can say hello my name
is and you can tell them who you are and
what we never seem to realize as people
is every time we meet a new person we
are writing our story from the beginning
and from that moment in time you know
and and you think about this like I
think of it through the lens of like
like characters characters sometimes I
go like if Luke Skywalker met you before
Luke meets you know Yoda L what is Luke
Luke is just like some random dude who
lives on like a Dusty planet hi my name
is Luke I live on a Dusty Planet you
meet Luke many years later like Luke's
like hi I'm a Jedi what a different way
to live as Luke and what a different way
to be you know and and I think that's
the beauty sometimes that we have of of
that we take for granted as people is
the ability to rewrite a story or to
write it from a different perspective
because we've moved on and we we've gone
somewhere else when you are now
known your anonymity is gone people have
a different idea of what privacy you
deserve ve or don't deserve um I've had
many friends who won't go out with me in
public because they go hey man I want to
have a meal and not be disturbed I want
to wear whatever clothes I want to wear
without worrying that they'll take a
picture of me standing next to you and
then I'll look terrible or you know I
don't want to think about these things
and I get it I get where they're coming
from you know I I I think many of the
the downsides of
Fame are the facts that as my mom even
puts it you are now owned by the world
you know people have this idea that no
matter what day you're having you should
engage with them no matter who you're
with you should afford them the time and
I understand it from their perspective
because for them they seeing you and
they're encountering you what a
beautiful
experience you know but it's hard for us
to imagine that that person is just
having a
day you know I I remember once joking uh
with an ex of mine and I saying it's
amazing how like when we're having like
dinner or lunch in public
we can't even tell like an animated
coners story to each other because if
someone just sees us from far it look
like we fighted you know so now we're
sitting there and I can't be like yo
this guy I was like and if someone takes
that picture and goes like Trevor no
fighting with his and it's like no and
and that becomes a thing in your world
and now friends are where are you
fighting and other people you'll be
shocked at how pervasive it is and I
think it's why so many um celebrities or
famous people or people in the public
eye have lived very depressed lives have
lived lives where they're isolated have
lived lives where they don't leave their
homes and you know and then you find
them you know passed out in their
bathtub overdosed on something think
about how many times you've heard that
story a really famous person has died
you never hear that they've died in
public you never hear that they've died
while with their friends no it's always
them alone in like hotel room yeah hotel
room a bathtub you know a hot tub but
it's always like a such a solitary like
ending for somebody that the and then
the whole world cries for them and with
them it's like oh I can't believe this
what what do you oh this is so sad and
I'm like yeah because you'll be shocked
at how
lonely being well- known can actually be
because it means you can never be alone
in many places and that's where I think
core friends are very important you said
in there that you what they don't know
is that you're human and that you're
going through life in all the same ways
as everyone else yeah well no not in the
same ways but in different ways and I
think that's that's
the you know I I you talk about
awareness yeah I'm very careful I you
know I and maybe it's because of how I
was raised as well very careful to not
make it like a woe is me thing I'm not
like Fame has hurt me and it's harmed me
and you know there are many things that
have come with it every gift is a curse
you know but but many of the things that
I came with I did not want nor did I
need I like waiting for a table at a
restaurant I genuinely do and I don't
mind that you know I I don't care for
I've never been somebody because my
friends have always been the thing in
fact one of the days I learned the
lesson in in in one of the most
practical ways was I love I love roller
coasters and I love going to theme parks
and I used to go with my friends and you
do the usual thing you stand in a line
for an hour and then you ride for like
60 seconds and then you walk for like 30
minutes to the next one and then you do
it all over again and I loved it and
then one day I was going to a theme park
and then the theme park knew I was
coming and now as the host of The Daily
Show and they're like Hey listen um we
heard that you you're at theme park we
would like to take you around to all the
rides and there's like no skip you skip
the lines and you you get to ride as
many times as you want and I was like
this I was like this is it The Daily
Show has paid off finally finally all
the death threats are worth it and we
went and we rode on the rides and we
were just manic we did every I mean we
did every ride that you couldn't do in a
day and we we finished a park would
probably take like let's say 8 to 10
hours to finish we did it all multiple
times in like the SP span of like 3
hours I had a headache my friends were
dehydrated we had had seldom a
conversation amongst us we and it was so
strange getting back in the
car and this felt like the most
depressing theme park experience we'd
ever had and we got back to the house
and I guess because my friends and I
like doing this we we sort of tried to
understand and analyze what have gone
wrong we're like why do we feel like
this and we came to the conclusion we're
like oh we assumed that the theme park
we love the theme park because of the
roller coasters what we didn't realize
was we love the theme parks because it
forced us to stand in line for an hour
as friends and just
be and we just talk this literally you
can't do anything else you have to stand
there for an hour and just like talk to
each other and then you hear people
screaming and and they've designed them
now like once I did that I started like
learning about theme Parx and how
brilliant ones do this to you on purpose
they make you wait in certain ways and
in certain places and then the screams
of other other the writers make you
anticipate something and become excited
and and it's all the ingredients for
like living a good life I feel is
instead of chasing like what seems like
the exciting roller coaster thing you
spend your time with the people you love
and you look forward to amazing things
that you're going to do hopefully with
them or maybe just for yourself and then
when you get there you enjoy it and then
on the other side you take a long walk
and you commiserate and you share the
experience with each other and you get
to process what has happened to you so
that when you do it again it becomes
novel and interesting and beautiful and
and and so that's that's like where I
realize like the downsides and the
upsides and the I so I I appreciate many
of the things that have come with my
life don't get me wrong but I I won't
lie to you I have as much fun in a
comedy club with 70 people in it as I do
in an arena with 12,000 people in it in
fact I have more fun in the comedy
club it's so paradoxical that adding
friction to an experience can make the
experience better but that's kind of
what you've described and as you were
talking about it I was thinking about
this study I read ages ago where they
took one group of people they they had
this Bor boring Community Forum yeah and
they took one group of people and they
let those people straight into this
boring Community forum and then they
asked them in a survey after how was the
community and all the people said boring
and they took another group of people
and they made them wait to get into the
forum they made them complete tests and
go through this rigorous process to
fight to get into the forum the people
went into the same forum and then in
surveys after they described The Forum
as being so much better that's than the
people who weren't made to go through
the The Gauntlet to get in and it's this
idea that friction adds value to the
thing we like fight for it like the 40
minute queue is what makes us so
grateful for the the roller coaster and
when you get robbed of that because you
get to play Life in Easy Mode or exactly
that's exactly what it is that's the
curse yeah it's crazy but also yeah the
point about connection I never thought
that so much of the enjoyment of going
to the theme park is standing there and
just small talking being for an hour
with my friends it's just being you
mentioned the word death threats on The
Daily Show yeah when you did get on to
the Daily Show which was a real first
for a show like that um it didn't go so
well at first oh yeah it was terrible I
didn't realize this I was looking at the
stats and I read that there was it was
absolutely terrible it was like man was
it was you know when they say be careful
what you wish for because I was like oh
I'd love a challenge and this will be an
interesting and oh oh it was a challenge
it was
absolutely
terrible
because I stepped into a role that I
quickly learned wasn't just a position
but it was it was almost um it was
almost I don't know how like it was like
a Post in a way it was it wasn't just
like you're hosting a show no no very
quickly learned like John Stewart to
many people you know he was the most
trusted man in America and he there was
the voice of a generation and he you
know the politicians who sort of Look to
Him and they're like well what would
John Stewart think and wow I mean that
that was and even if you remove the
legend that is John Stewart's just
taking over any show comes with a moment
where people don't like no one likes
change you know so like when Johnny
Carson handed over people weren't happy
you know when when when Leno Handover
people weren't happy it it always
happens is race an element in this I'm
sure for some people and but I think
it's you know I'm careful to say like
it's about race and I think it's more
it's all the things that make you
different yeah you know so me being
different in my color to John Stewart
probably makes a person feel like I'm
more different to him when I'm sitting
in the in the desk the show has changed
the show has been really yeah and and I
that I love if there's one thing I love
it's understanding or trying trying to
understand human beings cuz I think we
we're very complicated but we're also
simple at the same time and that was a
wonderful moment for me to like learn
like wow even people cuz these people
who were hating by the way it's not like
these were conservatives or anything
those was like liberal people who are
you know and some of the things they
were saying to me in emails or like on
onlineemail yeah yeah oh yeah people
they'll they'll find ways but you I I
would sit there and be like wow you
really hate me I've done nothing to you
but you hate me but then I realized no
you hate the idea of me and you hate
what I've done to your world I'm the I'm
the representative I'm the idea of how
your world has changed here's this idea
that you've loved John Stewart he's now
gone and I am the reason he's gone even
though that's not the case I am the
reason he's gone and because I'm the
reason he's gone you are now Angry death
threat oh yeah but I mean that was
extreme and you you get that because the
Daily Show is involved in politics you
know or we comment on politics rather
and and and when we do that man you know
people would just be like you go back to
where you came from you you know who who
how dare you and you're coming here and
end with this and blah blah blah and
blah blah blah again my gift and my
curse was that I came from South Africa
so I know like top quality racism so you
know like when I came to America and
like people were saying these things to
me I was like oh oh I was like okay this
okay this interesting you know but but
it it was really hard and I'm lucky that
I had the people I had making the show
with me
because they really really really taught
me or I learned from the
experience that you genuinely you cannot
choose what's going to happen to you but
you almost definitely can choose who
you're going to handle it
with and that is the only thing that I
now do in my life and it determines
everything I will take
a [__] job if I'm going to work with
great people because a great job with
the worst people is not going to feel
great on the other side of it you know
and and even thinking of it makes me
happy I think I think about the terrible
times we had together in that building
you know like reviewers hated us and
people calling for the show to be
canceled and and we were just like there
commiserating trying our best and doing
our best and and now when people see it
as a success story they go like oh you
won the emys and you you know and it was
this and was successful and then the
digital footprint of the show changed
everything and all of a sudden you you
know these billions of Impressions and
whatnot so yeah that came afterwards and
now that's that's easy to see as an end
product but when we were in the
trenches there was there was none of
that you know what was if I was a fly on
the wall in the worst day in the
trenches is there a day that Springs to
mind a day where you make maybe
considered reconsidered your decision a
day where you you didn't want to get out
of
bed I was reading the stats around this
to give people show had lost 700,000
viewers a night when you first took over
by the every night don't say like that
no no no you just made it sound like
like we lost them every every night not
every night it's from interv you GQ so I
know I know and by the H 100th um
episode it had lost 37% of its viewers
listen it went on to become a Smash Hit
across this digital no no but you're
right but I think that's important I
think it's important context cuz I
didn't know that I just watched the show
I saw it on social media and I thought
he's killing oh no man no it was it was
a it was a mission uh yeah and there
were there were many
days again I mean I'm just so grateful
and I'm so lucky there were days where I
remember there was one day we like made
a joke on the show not even on the show
no someone on the team had tweeted
something on the show account and now
there were like articles written about
it and they were like this is why Trevor
Noah shouldn't be the I wasn't even the
person who tweet it's the show
accountant but I you know I'm not going
to come out and be like that's not me
we're a team whatever my name is on the
show and I remember turning to um one of
the writers Dan amyra who's still the
head writes at the show and um I said to
Dan I was like man I like I think I
should just quit I was like it'll just
be easier for all of you because you
guys were having a great time I come
along I've made your lives terrible like
I should just quit I should just go you
know and then I'll never forget Dan he
just he just looked at me and he's he's
very dry one of the funniest human
beings you you'll ever a meat really dry
in his delivery and he looks at me and
he
goes but if you
leave this thing might get shut down and
then I don't get lunch
anymore I said I'm sorry what I'm like
pouring my heart out here and he's like
I like the lunch
here you you can just what what are you
talking
about and he and he said it to me in
such a like matter OFA way
and I remember being stunned and I
looked at him and he said um how do he
say it to me again I don't know the
exact words but the sentiment was
basically he
said he said these people don't like you
right and I was like yeah clearly and he
said so if you leave are they going to
like you I was like no then he's like so
if leaving won't make them like you and
staying won't make them like you I want
to just stay he's like because I like
working with you so just
stay and that was just like one of those
many moments where you know you talk
about
millimeters it was just him saying to me
just stay just
stay and I stayed and now everything
seems obvious but that building was full
of people who told me to just stay that
building was full of people who were
like I know one of them was John Stewart
like I'll never forget like John one of
the best things he ever did for me was
it's almost like he predicted this
that's why I call him Yoda I call him my
Jewish Yoda you know because we we have
this relationship where it's like like I
came into this order where I was
learning this new thing called you know
like the force and being a Jedi and it
seemed impossible and he was this
ordained figure in a way but I remember
he he called me into his office one day
and he said to me he said I want to I
want to show you something and he showed
me an
article that someone had written about
him leaving the show like he was you
know because he was this was just before
he left and the article was like why
John Stewart cannot leave the show and
why American needs him and why John
Stewart has to and it was just this
effusive article about like the 10 ways
that John Stewart is the heart of
American Pol he cannot leave and John
showed me that and he's like huh and
he's John's like doesn't take himself
seriously at all so John was like huh
and I was like yeah and he's like huh
huh and I'm like yeah congrats you you
crushed it he's like no no I crushed it
I'm important to America and we laugh
and then he goes hold on now and he
types something in and then he pulls up
an article
from like years ago years and years and
years ago but it was like not wait it
wasn't that far it was like it was like
three years prior two years PRI so he
was like at his prime but it was like
two three years before that and it was
like why John Stewart needs to leave The
Daily Show it's over for him he's the
worst of America it's he's not good for
this country was this whole article just
like slamming him and he's like you see
and I was like oh yeah I guess you know
things he's like no no no you're not
looking at the right thing and he's like
look who wrote it and it was the same
journalist
so when John was in they were like this
guy needs to leave and then when John
was leaving they were like oh this guy
needs to stay and he looked at me and he
said to me please understand that to me
he said to many people I have I have
always been obvious but he said I know
my road and I wasn't and he wasn't you
know when John took over the show Craig
kilborne had been the previous host
people thought John couldn't do it if
you said that today people would burn
you at a stake be like are you crazy
what do you mean John Stewart can't do
it that's what people said about him and
he was one of the those people who said
to me he like hey man I've been there
and maybe people don't remember it
because it we like pre- internet but he
was like put your head down and this is
part of the journey and I leaned on him
I leaned on the other people and it was
just like you know just like a slow you
know boring slog you know filled with
many funny and sad moments and then one
day it seems obvious to to people from
the outside and when you go home on
those days and you're alone in your
apartment or at home in your house and
you're not around the guy that wants the
lunch and the the colleagues at
work what is that like I read that
you're someone that suffered with
depression periodically throughout your
life your adult life as well were you
suffering in that period when you were
alone I didn't realize at the time that
the depression that I was suffering from
was ADHD depression it wasn't like
depression depression and I I've learned
since that there's a difference so I I
related to many ideas in and around
depression but I remember been confused
cuz I was like I'm not depressed
perpetually but I I definitely
experienced these moment I didn't know
that ADHD can do that to you I didn't
know that it can be like a byproduct of
untreated um ADHD and not knowing that
you have ADHD so that's just like a sort
of like a footnote there but
um but it's funny you say that when you
went home and you see I wasn't alone and
that's probably the reason I survived so
David was with me every single day he
had moved from South Africa we started
like a comedy night together that's how
long we had been working together so we
would walk out of that building together
on the hottest nights in New York and on
the coldest nights in New York and we
would go back and we live together in
the same apartment and then we'd open
like our notebooks and we'd be like all
right what could we have done better and
we would just sit there and we'd be like
what could we have done better and we'd
get home at like 88 or 900 p.m. and then
we'd work until midnight go to bed get
back to the office at 78 the next day
and do it all over again and then we'd
come home in the evening be like what
were the wins what could we have done
better
and we would just do this over and over
but I was never alone and so I never
think of it you know that's that's why I
wish like more people would share their
stories in that way is because I think
we live in a world where so many people
sell an idea of perseverance as an
individualistic Pursuit when it's
not I think too many people forget the
pets on the back and the hugs and the
encouragements and the load liftings
they forget all of it they see their
suffering they see their success and
then they go out and sell to the world
how you got to persevere let me tell you
what in the darkest times let me tell
you what I did Stephen I looked at
myself in the mirror and I said Trevor
you're going to do it Trevor you're
going to be the man at The Daily Show
you're going to yeah but everyone
forgets they're like no your friend was
there going like man do you want to go
get some chicken wings let's go get some
chicken wings there was somebody
accepting you despite your
failure there was somebody who was
reminding you of that part of you that
you always wish to be which is somebody
who can solve a puzzle is somebody who
enjoys what they're doing is somebody
who perseveres but they're they're
looking at that side of me and so I
wasn't alone was me it was David was
Joseph
opio guy who was random is now one of my
best friends a writer from Uganda who
did The Daily Show like a version of The
Daily Show in
Uganda what a like this weird world
coming together you meet us today you'll
think we've known each other our whole
lives but he was also he was just there
and he's like I Believe in Us he's like
I think we can do this I think we can do
it I think we can do it and but if you
were going home alone oh then I wouldn't
be here with you I I I will put all my
money on that I would not be here with
you but I don't even think I would have
taken the Daily Show I wouldn't have
done the Daily Show when you say you
wouldn't be here with me what do you
mean by that oh you wouldn't be calling
me here to have an interview with me
because I wouldn't have done the things
that I've done because I couldn't have
done them alone because nobody could
have done them alone nobody has done the
things they've done
alone you know
like everyone I've seen people tell
these stories of climbing Mount Everest
and Maya sent and my yo all those
sherpers that went with you let's talk
about them no one's climbing Everest
alone no one's discovering you know the
the the South Pole alone no you weren't
in fact the the person who was the guy
who like like first navigated the South
Pole was led there by somebody you know
what I mean all these stories that we
tell self-made oh I love that phrase
it's my favorite self-made billionaire
oh really oh it's an interesting choice
of words so you just did this all by
yourself huh you made the thing by
yourself with your hands you made many
more of them by yourself you drove the
trucks you thought of all the ideas you
put it in the stores you gave it to the
people you took the money you invested
it you grew it all by yourself all by
yourself all the ideas were from your
head all by yourself and then you got
there all come on there's there's no
such thing and I don't think it
diminishes your achievement I just think
it's important because it helps people
understand that they need other people
to get to where they're trying to get to
and maybe sometimes the reason you're
not experiencing that is because you're
trying to do it alone I hear people all
the time go like I'm gonna put my head
down and I'm GNA I'm going to crush it
okay alone good
luck good luck and I think it creates an
unrealistic expectation for people
people who studied together in school
got better marks
there was just like a simple thing that
we learned in our school when I was
growing up if you had a study partner
you just learned
more the idea of the sherpers is such a
good analogy because the sherpers never
really get the credit in the story they
never mentioned in the article but
they're lifting most of the bloody
weight and they're literally keeping you
alive yeah they've ascended Everest more
than the most celebrated Everest
Ascender how are they not the ones it's
the equivalent of finding out that like
somebody ran carrying you same bolt
but then we don't consider them the
fastest man alive yeah you know and and
so I I don't know that so I I'm I'm
always cautious to think of that because
it doesn't like I say it doesn't
diminish what you've done but man you're
not doing it alone and that and to to
realize that I think helps you to
understand why it's important to have
those people and why it then brings Joy
why did you leave The Daily Show because
the moment you left the Daily Show you'd
won these huge Awards the show was had
caus this sort of digital Revolution
which we hadn't seen before
where the The Daily Show had become you
know from my experience of The Daily
Show was much more of an online show
than had ever been before um most of the
time I watch The Daily Show I'd be
watching it on YouTube or I'd be
watching it on clips that were going
around the internet and you know the
billions and billions of views it was
they doing it that point why would
someone leave that
situation I don't know why someone would
leave it why did you leave it because it
it was time it was just time how'd you
know I don't know that's that's
something I've always felt I've known in
life life and I don't know why like the
fight yeah but but not in a negative way
this is this is more okay so so here's
the thing I think part of it comes from
where I am from and maybe you'll relate
to this as somebody from from the
UK in South Africa TV shows
end we've never had a TV show except
maybe like one soap opera but we've
never had TV shows that run for 10
Seasons or 20 season that's not a thing
it it ends and it doesn't end because
it's bad it ends it just
ends and I I look at some of my favorite
creates of things you know like I look
at like Seinfeld they were like all
right it's done the network was like we
can we can give you more we can do more
they're like yeah but we it's done we we
just feel like it's
done you
know sometimes things can be done and
and for me I think there were there were
multiple reasons you know one was
definitely the
pandemic I took for granted that the
pandemic was a moment where many people
were forced to be at home but then you
know the the silver lining of that
terrible period for many people was that
they got to like just like pause for a
moment you know many people will tell
you the story of how they're like man
during the
pandemic I just like paused and I you
know we didn't I didn't I was making the
show from home and I was I was just
going at it and I I I'm I'm really glad
and I'm Lu that I got to do that because
it it sort of shielded me from some of
the panic that came with the pandemic of
what are you doing what are you not
doing where's life going I was just like
I'm just doing my show I'm just doing
the show I'm doing the show I'm doing
the show find a way to do it from home
shoot it using iPhones we didn't even
have like cameras we didn't have a crew
we didn't have anyone it was just me
David cuz he lived in the same building
and then the other David and it was just
three people you know physically making
a thing that's supposed to take many
many many people you know but here you
are and you're doing this but you but
you're virtual and you're not in the
same room as people and you and you
can't travel and and I was I was
experiencing all of this I I couldn't go
back to South Africa I couldn't travel
the world I couldn't and one of the big
things I learned during the pandemic was
I had made my life about work and I had
made everything else
secondary right so I would see my
friends if I did not have work I would
travel with my friends if I did not have
work I would come to your wedding if I
did not have work
but work was the thing and everyone in
my life knew this they were like oh yeah
work you know Trevor if you're not
working can you they'd almost say that
to me and on the other side of the
pandemic I realized I was
like I I can do the daily I looked up
and I was like wow it's been it's been
eight years of me being at The Daily
Show seven years of me hosting one year
of me being a you know a contributor at
times when John Stewart was there
but I was like you sort of can do this
forever
but but maybe but what what else can you
do where else can you be how can you
spend your time what what would you like
to do and how would you like to do it um
I learned so many things at The Daily
Show I'm eternally grateful for
them but I also would like to learn more
things even in the years that I haven't
been there I've relearned and reemed
that politics isn't a binary it's not
blue and red that's that's an illusion
there aren't two ideas for every problem
that's that's fake there are there are a
multitude of ways to discuss any issue
and any topic but if you stay in one
place for long enough then in a good way
and in a bad way you start to perceive
that as as reality and
so you know there were many things when
it when it came to me leaving The Daily
Show but I I just felt like yeah it's
time you you scared scared yeah of of
sometimes people get scared when they
have such a high Post in soci Society um
that they might be losing something they
could never get back or they might you
know it oh that's
fascinating I'm thinking about the
average person listening to this now
who's in their job and they make might
might be a lawyer who's climbed the
ladder yeah and they've got this sort of
internal voice saying something isn't
right here but this fear that keeps them
trapped in places the loss aversion even
if you're miserable this this the power
of loss aversion can just hold people
people in place I read this crazy study
with Dr Daniel kman I believe it was
Daniel kman the famous yeah yeah right
going he he did the studies where if you
drop like a dollar on the floor yes the
pain of losing the dollar is equal to
the pain of finding three yes so in life
you don't just need you know equal
reward to to sacrifice something you
need two or three times the reward to
leave well I will say this first and
foremost I was lucky I wasn't miserable
you know I wasn't like I I I didn't have
like a ah I hate this or I
no but but I did want to turn and focus
my life on something more more yeah like
I wanted to spend more time with my
loved ones I wanted to spend more time
with my people I wanted to spend more
time in South Africa I wanted to spend
more time learning other languages and
traveling I wanted to spend more time
practicing comedy in other countries was
that a feeling yeah and what is that
feeling that
because yeah I'm trying to understand
the feeling or the emotion that tells
you
that so I I guess it goes to the Now
sort of cliche but still I think very
apt phrase You Don't Know What You've
Got Till It's
Gone the pandemic showed me like all the
things I I I even talk about this for
people it it it showed me all the things
that I didn't value that I should have
like when the pandemic hits If we're
honest we didn't care that we couldn't
go to the movies or we couldn't like
it's not it's not about the stuff
is that we couldn't do it with our
people you couldn't see your friends you
couldn't be with other human beings you
couldn't be in a space together where
people are cheering or singing or
laughing or you you couldn't be with
people and I don't know about you but
during the pandemic I wasn't sitting
there thinking to myself ah I I work
work is the thing I could do more
of no I was thinking to myself wow my
people my all my friends that are Sou AF
were trapped in South Africa couldn't
leave couldn't come to me I couldn't go
to them couldn't see my
family and I wasn't even big on that
it's not even like I was like I've
always got to go home to see my family I
just go when I'd go but now I realize
like wow this this is just again it's
fleeting and you and and I had to ask
myself Trevor what are you trying to
achieve in your life where where do you
want it to go where do you want it to
end you know what's more important to
you the the ratings and the success of
this show show and this idea or the
ratings on the success of your
friendships and your
relationships you know and I and I do
think in life you have to let go of
something old to to grab onto something
new
and that that was a decision for me that
because I I couldn't I can't be in two
places at once and The Daily Show is all
consuming you cannot be you know sort of
part-time in it as an idea you know in
fact John and I joke now but now he gets
to do it weekly and I think if anything
he'd never go back to doing it daily
because he knows how all consuming it
can be like I I didn't just do The Daily
Show when I was there I would do The
Daily Show when I was there and then I
would leave and I would read the news
and I'll keep up with the news and I'll
try and keep up with all the news and
I'm reading the guardian and I'm I'm
reading BBC and then I'm reading like
right Wings sites I'm reading bright
Barts and I'm I'm reading what's on
conservative media and then I'm reading
you know the Telegraph and The Economist
and that's all I'm doing consuming news
news news news news news news news get
get more news get more news barely read
a fiction book in year just like more
news I need information and news Okay
economists analysis what's happening how
how do I put this together what's
happening elzero okay okay think about
that what's going on in them Times of
India what's happening what's happening
what's happening what's happening it's a
lot yeah aot the brain it's too much and
especially for someone with your brain
if I say so myself from what how you've
described it someone who's so sort of
hyper sensitive and aware um and it's
someone who appears to me to be a little
bit of an empath I you said you know
when we said you're good at you feel
things
yeah I the the you know what it did
teach me and this is something I I tell
everyone till this day give yourself a
break from the news give yourself a
break we've we've we've been told and
we've been conditioned to believe that
we all need to keep up with the
news it's a lie it's an
illusion you'll know what's happening in
fact if you read the news once a week I
promise you you will be as informed as
somebody who's reading it every single
day you know why cuz when you're reading
it every day you were caught in the
cycle of it trying to discover what it
doesn't know yet developing story
developing story developing story you'll
be shocked that what you learn when you
just read a story that sort of had the
time that it needed to
breathe there's there's less there's
less predicting there's less guessing
there's there's less pontificating this
it's just like this is what happened and
this is what we know and that's it when
was the first time you went to
therapy first time I went to therapy was
uh
2015 2014 somewhere there yeah why did
you go to therapy I I asked this because
um for a set of reasons really but um
men in particular and in fact if you
look at the stats men of color are often
the least likely to go to therapy and
there's a complex reasons why that is
but I think it's quite important for men
that have been to therapy including
myself to to talk about why they went
and also um so sort of the journey
they've been on with it but also the
role that it's
played so I'll I'll say it in two parts
I so I went to therapy
because I fell in love with the idea
that I could learn more about myself and
why I was the way I was from somebody
who was skilled in in understanding it
in the same way that I loved Physical
Therapy mhm you know I I was like wow
you you can like move your body
differently if you've ever had physical
I therapy you know what I'm talking
about and if you haven't you should go
one day if you have anything wrong with
you long before you consider surgery and
things you'll be shocked you'll be
shocked at how your neck hasn't been
moving the way it's supposed to you'll
be shocked to realize that your back has
been like like stuck for a while you
haven't been breathing you you'll find
that your knees haven't been like you
say no but really it's it's actually
crazy to realize how much over time
you've settled
into a
restriction that's stopping you from
being yourself fully physically but
mentally as
well patterns and as you said games of
snap where you don't even realize you're
now just reacting things are happening
and you're reacting to
them and I read a bunch of books I was
like wow this is fascinating but I was
like none of it like tells me about me
per se it's very Broad and so I decided
like let me go to this place to try and
learn about who I am or if there's even
a puzzle that that I can learn a little
bit more about how did that feel the
first time you went but also telling
your friends that you're going to
therapy because there especially in 2015
it's kind of Fallen away slowly as more
people talk about it but there is a
stigma associated with it and stigma
well everyone asked me they said what
why what's wrong that's what everyone
said to
me every everyone said the same thing
what's wrong one of my favorite ones
this wasn't a friend but I uh I I did an
interview with a um a British newspaper
uh I forget what which one it's called
maybe it's the telegraph I'm not sure
it's it's slightly conservative but but
any anyway we did this interview I'll
never forget this and the woman was very
British very Posh you know older woman
and she said to me she's like you you've
been quite outspoken about about going
to therapy and do do you still go to
therapy and I was like yes and she's
like why what's wrong with you and I
said do you do you go to therapy and she
said I don't need to and I was like well
everyone can benefit from therapy she's
like I I respectfully disagree I think I
think the the therapizing that we that
we're currently experiencing in the
world is completely unnecessary and
sometimes you you just need to take it
and move on and I was like that is the
most British thing I've ever heard in my
life um but but I get it that's what a
lot of people felt and think you know
they be like why what are you
doing what I've come to realize
is that therapy as an idea holds a
stigma but the thing that it is
doing is not just necessary but it's
actually welcomed by
everybody when you go and you have a
conversation with your friends and you
commiserate about something that's going
on in your life it's a form of therapy
you know when you confide in your loved
one the two of you are in bed at the end
of a long day and you you're telling
them about how stressful your job is and
you you you know you're telling them
about your doubts about staying in it or
not that's a form of therapy and I think
because we've given it this formalized
title that's associated with like
psychotic breaks on the most extreme
things we've now made it seem like it's
reserved for people who are only like
broken broken broken MH but we've
forgotten how necessary it is you know
like you you you go around the world and
you see cultures many of them cultures
of
color had the idea and and the and the
tradition of therapy long before it was
formalized as a concept in African
cultures you would speak to the elders
that's what you do you go and you sit
down with the elders you tell them about
your problems you go there with your
wife you go there with your family you
go any dispute you go and talk about it
there and they give you their advice and
it's based on generations of knowledge
and it's based on a communal
understanding of who you are and who
they are they've known you since you
were a child even it's a form of therapy
you know and so I think because we given
it this this like the label people I go
to therapy I realized if if you just
change that take that sentence out and
tell it to somebody and go oh yeah no
there's um a wonderful Elder who I speak
to and and they give me advice you all
of a sudden like half the people who
look at you f you be like that's very
good you must listen to your elders
that's very good you know and then in
another culture you say to somebody oh I
go to somebody who um spiritually
understands how like my brain works and
they and they connect me with myself
they be like that's very good you do
that we we we all do it you know
bartenders have been therapists for
hundreds of years you know people have
gone and gotten drunk at a bar
hairdresses yeah hairdresses it's it's a
natural thing it's just you know I
understand the stigma because there's a
terrifying notion that comes with saying
that you're broken but I I don't think
it's about saying that we're broken it's
just about like understanding our cracks
did you understand your cracks from it I
think I understood them um theoretically
my problem was never understanding them
my problem was never like understanding
them on a on a on an intellectual level
I think I've I've always been good at
that maybe even too good the thing I've
had to learn in therapy is the feeling
part not the thinking Parts what do you
mean by the feeling part so I I've
always been very good I would be able to
break down any situation to you as as
thoughts and you know an analytics in a
way mhm you go like Trevor what happened
there I would even be able to explain
like an outburst well what happened was
clearly over time this action had been
repeated and I didn't appreciate it and
so at that point I'd reached my breaking
point and I reacted like this you know
and it's but I didn't realize until I
went to therapy that I limited how much
I was saying the feeling that I was
having I felt
sad I felt mad I felt and then like you
said about tracing it back you then now
once you understand that
feeling and once you acknowledge it
you're then able to now and then even
ask yourself why do I feel this thing
why do I even
feel and start realizing that some
people can make you feel when others
can't two people can say the exact same
sentence to you only one can have an
effect why and and that was that was and
continues to be my journey and my my my
joyous challenge it's like learning how
to like feel not just think through
everything it's like really just feel
how do I feel I'm tired oh I'm I'm
resentful wow I'm I'm sad about that oh
I'm feeling a little hopeless I wow this
this feels a little melancholic this is
like really getting into those feelings
men don't do that do they they just just
drink or they just go yeah men just get
like pissed masturbate gamble yeah porn
like I'm I'm angry at you when was the
last time a male friend looked at
another male friend and said I you hurt
me you know hey man that
hurts I know you think my haircut looked
funny but the way you said it in front
of those other people it hurts hey the
way you commented on my job and how you
think it's it's the dumbest thing that
hurt me that it like it hurt me cuz I
love how you see me and I want to see
myself being special in your life and it
I felt insignificant you hurt me
man men are terrified of that you know
and so we'd rather say you pissed me off
punch you in the head I because that's
that's acceptable in society we are that
you know you said your therapist or
therapy helped you to identify this link
between ADHD and depression when did you
find out you had ADHD I got diagnosed
two years ago my friend got diagnosed
first told me about it changed his whole
life and then when he was describing
some of the symptoms I was like huh I
was like well that that's weird that
sounds a lot like me and we very
different person personality wise mhm
and then I asked him I said I said I
don't understand you I've never noticed
these things in you and he was like yeah
he was very good at hiding them he was
very good at masing them and it it was
it it hit home so much that it made me
think I I need to get diagnosed I was
like let me go and see I was like it
could it might not be but let me go and
and and find out and then I I I
remembered that when I was a kid my
school told my mom that I need to go for
a psychiatric evaluation because when I
was really young the teachers complained
they said I was just I was just all over
the place and my mom took me to a
psychiatrist and the psychiatrist
diagnosed me with ADHD but back then it
was called
hyperactivity and my mom the the
therapist like oh your son is you know
has ADHD or is hyperactive and so you
must stay away from these foods and must
do this and you must do that and you
should could give him treatment and my
mom was like we'll pray for him let's
keep it
moving she did she just didn't know and
she was like no this is not a
thing you know and then I now as an
adult went wait a minute was that what
that
was and then I went went through the
like real assessment like I mean not
like an online quiz you know the one
where you sit down it's multiple visits
you do different types of tests
multimodal tests and you go through it
all and then I learned about my ADHD and
I think that's another thing like I'm a
little worried about now in society is
just like when we talk about and Ai and
everything we flatten these these these
words and so what then starts to happen
is now I meet people everywhere
everyone's got like I've got ADHD I've
got ADHD I've got I can't watch a movie
for more than 10 minutes I've got ADHD I
lost my keys yeah and it's like no you
can be forgetful and not have ADHD you
can have a short attention span and not
have
ADHD you can you can be many things and
not have ADHD right but even when you
have ADHD you don't all have the same
ADHD mhm you know some people are
inattentive some people are hyperactive
some people have learned coping
mechanisms some people haven't in women
and men it it it it presents differently
at times so I think we must also be
careful you know like now it's just
become like yeah and then like on Tik
Tok hey how how to deal with your ADHD
it's like wait wait wait wait wait let's
you know it's it's good that we're
talking about these things but let's not
be quick to you know to all have it and
have the same version of it and all
think that all of our treatments are
exactly the same Etc but that yeah
that's so I think I mine
was I think it's now 3 four years ago
this link between ADHD and depression
I've you're the
first person I've interviewed I've heard
about this before but you're the first
person that I've spoken to who has said
that their Depression was linked to
their ADHD yeah can you explain to me
the link and how that sort of manifests
so I I didn't understand it but you know
as I understand ADHD now what what
fundamentally happened in my brain and I
guess it'll happen to some people as
well
is I would have an inability to choose
where to place my focus right one of the
things so I would either be hyperfocused
by something that I shouldn't or I would
have no Focus for the thing that I
should so I could be having a
conversation with you here and let's say
there was a car outside revving its
engine at some point that's all I'd be
able to think about even though you're
speaking to me
that's all I'd be able to think about is
like who's revving this engine who's
driving this car what is going on out
there what kind of car is that sounds
like a V6 is that a truck what are they
huh something wrong no it's and now
you'd be talking and then at the end of
the sentence I just hear the last three
words you said and then I'd try and like
put it all together and act like I was I
was paying
attention but what my brain was also
doing in that paying attention thing was
it was focusing on a recurring thought
or recurring idea that I couldn't let go
of and that's sometimes where the
depression would kick in is that I would
be perpetually stuck in a loop of either
meaninglessness or what I like to call
personally it's like my my zoom was
stuck on my lens you know like I think I
think the way you see life is is
literally like a lens I shouldn't have
done that with my hands in a video
that's going to be we can photo yeah
just going to meme that but anyway like
I think of a of a lens right and what
you're doing with a lens all the time
when you're getting focused when you're
zooming is you're trying to place your
focus on the object that you're trying
to place it on if you zoom out too wide
you can't see the object if you zoom in
too much you also can't see the object
you've got to find the right Zoom so
that you know okay we're now looking at
a cup if you zoom in too much you just
go like I'm looking at a at at Silver
I'm looking at a color you zoom out too
much you can't even see that we're in
this room MH you know I'm looking at
people they like no there's a cup oh I
didn't see it and so what was happening
in my brain was I would get stuck in a
zoom and I would just Loop so sometimes
it would be me going huh that was an
interesting day at
work oh I go to work tomorrow then I go
to work the next day then the next day
and then the next day then there's a
weekend but then I'm back at work then
wait a minute it's just weeks and
weekends Forever This Never it just
keeps on going and then and then one day
you're like you're 90 and then and then
you're dead and wait what why am I going
to work tomorrow what what's the point
of what what is happening here this
makes absolutely no and then I'll just
sit there and I couldn't get that out of
my head I I literally could not get that
thought out of my head and I would just
sit there like what is the point of this
what what are we
doing couldn't get it out of my head and
how does that feel when you can't get
that out of your head what is the
feeling for me it felt like life was
meaningless like the concept of it was
meaningless I was like we're a blip what
are we doing here all of this means
nothing all of this is
pointless you know is that an exact
example of something that would make no
this is an exact example this is
something that would get stuck in my
head because I because I because I
didn't know with ADHD like that I was
hyperfocusing on this thing so in the
same way that I could hyperfocus on you
know learning about I don't know a
discipline you know industrial design or
artificial intelligence I would just you
you know what I'm talking about with
that I'd get hyperfocused and then I'd
learn everything about it and I'd read
every book and I talk to every person I
could and I would watch everything and I
and all of a sudden you know in like 3
months you'd meet me and I'd go like yep
I've read that book I've read that book
I've read that and I'm obsessed with
this thing and then one day it just
disappears now that's fine for like
learning let's say but it would be
terrible for oh gosh an idea of like
sadness or an idea of feeling like life
is going nowhere or it can't be good for
pig
famous it's like the worst thing
because you have con like meaningless
feedback and the brain is trying to
interpret a lot of it exactly if you get
one of those things stuck in your head
gosh yeah and then mine also like it
depends on some people have it some
don't but like patent recognition people
with ADHD are generally can be very good
with patn recognition probably why
they're good Comedians and so what
happens then unfortunately is you can
also start to see the patterns in life
that can make life seem meaningless
but once I once I got my ADHD diagnosis
and once I understood what was happening
I really did start to see it as as a
lens and anytime I find myself in those
moments now because I don't I don't take
medication you know I took medication
like once or twice I like it didn't help
me in my comedy I actually need to be
erratic and unfocused when I'm doing
comedy and I'm lucky that I live a life
where I don't have to be in an office at
a time and do a thing in a certain way
and you know but in coping or in like
learning how to deal with it I've
learned just about like that lens and
I'll talk to myself you know I go
there's me and there's the Observer like
I'm the Observer of my thoughts I'm not
the thoughts and then I I'll talk to
myself so I'll be like man you do this
tomorrow and then the next day and then
life is me then I go like it is it is
meaningless unless unless you zoom in
and then if you zoom in a little bit
more all of a sudden wow it's almost
like the most meaningful thing this
conversation with this person is the
most meaningful conversation you will
ever have in your life this is it this
is everything that it is
this hug that you're getting from your
friend is the most important thing you
will ever experience this meal that
you're having just taste these
ingredients what what is taste feel it
on your on your on your taste buds and
and like one of the tools they they
teach you like with ADHD sometimes you
know when when it when it makes you go
into anxiety or depression is to just
notice things practice being present
walk down the street and like look like
really look and say out loud what you're
seeing and at first it's very stupid
that is a red door that is a green roof
that is a pigeon sitting on the gutter
that is a gutter that is a gray car that
is driven by and you'll be shocked at
how just doing that gets your brain out
of that Loop and then something's going
to catch your eye or something will
spark and by the end of that walk you
won't be in the mood that you were in
when you started that
walk did you ever feel hopeless when you
spiraled into this sort of rumination
was there ever a moment through this
journey of understanding your depression
that you felt hopeless I didn't I didn't
I this is this is going to sound really
weird to
you the I have this I have this strange
thing that will happen to me sometimes
in life where where I feel like it's
it's I go it's all meaningless and it's
nothing and it's whatever it's very very
random often times I've just learned
sometimes fatigue you know I've learned
rules now for myself and for anyone out
there really especially if you have
ADHD before you go through anything or
before you think about anything like in
intently and intensely when you're
struggling ask yourself a few simple
questions have you
slept have you eaten well like have you
eaten good food have you moved your body
and have you spent a little time
breathing if you answer yes to all of
those questions you can continue to
pontificate about the meaning of life
and everything that you're going through
if you have not just fulfill all of them
and then see if you're still feeling the
same on the other side and you'll be
shocked how often times you aren't so
the one thing that happen to me this is
this is so ridiculous I know sometimes
when I'd be in that place I'd feel a
little
hopeless right and I would think to
myself I hate this this
sucks I I I don't know what I want to do
with life anymore never like suicidal
but just like I just don't know if this
life thing what is this and then I would
go if if it was going to end tomorrow
then what what would I do like today
then
be like you know what I'm going to do
I'm going to go on stage I'm going to
tell that joke that I've been terrified
to tell just going to say it because I'm
leaving anyway life is ending it's going
it's all going away because it's all
going to [__] right just go and say that
go tell that joke I'll be like you know
what I should also I should also I
should also throw a party I mean your
life's ending anyway it's just throw
like one just like one just like [__]
off party that you just like go into it
and and and I think of all the things
and I I mean this genuinely I think of
all the things that I would do with like
giant middle fingers on my way out and
the smile that it brings to my
face I can't explain to you because
every time it makes me realize that
that's all I should be trying to do not
in a in a way where I don't I don't
consider other people but it's what I
should be trying to do and it's made me
realize that at times not everyone but
for me and I think some people would
probably feel this sometimes what's
happened in our lives and I know I had
this is like you feel
like you don't you don't realize that
you've stopped sort of like running
jumping smiling screaming you've stopped
being everything you can be and you've
just You' started existing as one
version of
yourself and sometimes just having the
idea of just like you know what I mean
take all your clothes off and run
through the streets screaming and and
what would you say and who would you say
it to and why would you say you'd be
shocked at how that gives you an inkling
of what you're not doing for yourself
some people might be like I'll tell my
dad to go screw himself I would say to
you oh this is probably you realizing
that you don't set boundaries with your
dad and you don't communicate well maybe
you don't tell your dad how you hurt
your feelings or I man I'll I'll go to
work and I'll well yeah maybe this is
not the job for you you know I'll I'll
party all night maybe you're not taking
enough time to have fun I you'll be
shocked at how like sometimes you
not not a tantrum but it's just like
your your screw you
choice is what you sort of should be
doing in a in a in a in a responsible
way and and that I promise you now in
all those moments where I felt like it's
hopeless with the moments where I'd come
back even more I think to myself huh
maybe I should try aiming to get to that
place and therein in a strange way lies
the meaning for me it's such a beautiful
thing that they can be really important
answers in such a desperate state but
but I completely understand what you're
saying cuz I played out the example in
my head that this was my last day I
thought what are the things I'd love to
do and again it's such a so clear to me
that those are the things that I I'm
missing right now from my life my
experience exactly you mentioned dads in
there and you did reunite with your
biological father yeah sort of 24 years
old 25 years old when you reunited with
him I believe yeah 20 something
somewhere there what's that like is that
is that com licated or is that oh
definitely definitely and why did you
why did you reunite with him because
well I reunited with him because my
mother gave me a key piece of advice
which was valuable and she said to me
she said don't take for granted the
answers that a person can hold of you
that you may not even know you needed
for
yourself you know and I think parents
have that with us especially if parents
are willing to engage with you you know
if these are human beings that that have
fundamentally shaped you you are you are
half of them you know they are half of
you it's it's it's a weird thing that
you that you can take for
granted and
so for me like the the gift of
reconnecting with my father was
reconnecting with him as as a man a
young man all be at a man you know are
you scared I scared isn't the right word
I I
was I was unsure but I wasn't scared you
know it's
like it's that that feeling of the
unknown what what's going to happen what
are we like will we get along will we
not get along I remember him but as a
boy and does he even remember me does he
even like me does he you have all these
ideas is there a part of you that wants
to know if he if he loves you if he
cares about you I think I think
definitely and I but I but I think we
don't even think of it like that and I
didn't even think of it like that does
that make sense because because I
assumed the love cuz I'd seen it my
whole life from him so I assumed the
love but I didn't I think the thing
that's adjacent to that love is the
choosing yeah you know sometimes you you
assume that parents love you but you're
not sure that they choose you
maybe uh and so that was that was
interesting for me and then seeing parts
of myself that I didn't even know came
from another person it it it's it's
fascinating frustrating and liberating
at the same time although he wasn't
around all the time did you learn
lessons from him when you met him when
you started to sort of rekindle your
relationship with
him I think I did but not lessons that
were taught lessons that were
witnessed I think most of the lessons
that we learned from our parents aren't
taught to be honest what did you learn
from him I definitely think from him I
learned how important it is to maintain
your
friendships you know
he he's lived a long life
he older than my mom but even as he's
gone into his old age he still has
friends he still has Community he still
has like he he showed me how wonderful
that thing is you know because
friendship I feel like friendship has
has in many ways been been given the
short end of the stick in in the world
of
relationships you know people understand
the value of like parents and children
and then people understand like romantic
relationship they go oh that's the most
of course your spouse your but your
friendships are one of the few
relationships that don't necessarily
rely on like a like a a transaction in a
way it's like purely
Choice whenever I speak to entrepreneurs
there's one problem that always comes up
but today's sponsor LinkedIn has a
solution and I think you'll want to hear
it connecting your business with the
Right audience can be tough you can
spend a lot of time and money trying to
get it right and still regardless fall
short of that especially when it comes
to B2B marketing where you're not doing
business with one person you're dealing
with teams making decisions together
through Linkedin ads you can connect
with an extensive Professional Network
of over a billion members including 10
million seite Executives you can also
Target specifically by job title
industry company and more it's no
surprise to me that LinkedIn is reported
to be the highest returning paid social
platform in the world to help you get
started LinkedIn is offering a $100
credit to launch your first campaign on
the platform just go to linkedin.com
doac 24 to claim your credit now that's
linkedin.com
doac c24 terms and conditions
apply Patricia she is so C she's your
mother yeah she's so Central to your
story um to much of the wisdom you have
you talk about continuing the legacy of
her Legacy I guess and everything that
she's instilled in you she um she she
sounds like a superwoman in every sense
of the word the the the the apparent
resilience and I say apparent because I
don't know how to define the
perseverance in the face of so many
struggles other than using the word
resilience is astounding I found I won't
show this picture either but I found
this beautiful photo of you which
reminded me a little bit of oh that one
you can because I've posted it online
there you go one of the things I've
struggled with is with the disconnect
between me and my parents is I've I've
struggled with the thought that there's
going to be words
unsaid oh and I I asked some of my guest
gu this about this because I think
because I'm trying to navigate it for in
myself and within my own
life if you had a 60-second phone call
with Patricia and you knew it was going
to be your last what would the words be
what would you choose to say oh I I
think it would just be I love you I love
you thank you thank you thank you thank
you I love you I love you thank you so
much I love
you that's pretty and genuinely that's
pretty much it
because uh I'm I'm really lucky that
I've I've said and I continue to try to
say you know most of what I
should um to my mom and there's always
new things that come up and then I try
to say them and we we have beautiful
conversations you know like these days
we take like drives like drive her to go
and buy a new chicken for her he's got
like a little chicken it's not even a
farm I don't even know what to call it
it's like a little Squad of chickens but
I just I'll just take her for a drive
and then we just talk about life and we
we just we talk and we share and we
laugh and we but we like it's like the
nothing moments you know no agenda no
like there's no thing we have to do or
not do I sort of slip into her life you
know I find her in the garden and I just
stand around while she does her
gardening and then listen talk share but
really that's if if that was the call
now it would just be thank you thank you
I love you so much thank you very much I
love you I love you thank you so much
and I guess that early experience where
she was shot by yeah your um really kind
of allowed you to get the perspective
yeah yeah definitely for most of us us
would that definitely have the
perspective she sounds like a remarkable
person when you talk about continuing
her Legacy how how' you do that well she
would challenge me and say my my goal is
to improve on her Legacy you know um my
mom's definitely
remarkable um but as she would say it's
you know by the grace of God it's not by
her hand alone
and I think one of the things that I've
Loved most about my relationship with my
mom is that I've come to
learn that part of what makes her so
exceptional is the fact that she's a
flawed human being she's not perfect the
there are some wounds that she's
inflicted on me that I need to now deal
with in my life because she's been my
parents you know and and this is this is
sometimes the Paradox that we struggle
with in in our lives as people I think
we we've been we've been so
indoctrinated into this like binary way
of
thinking that we then want to go we had
great parents or we had terrible parents
sometimes you had a parent who was great
at some things and terrible at other
things you know and if they did love you
they were doing their best sometimes
they didn't and I think that's tough for
some people to acknowledge but if they
loved you they were doing their best and
they tried their best and they failed at
other things and that's fine but you
know my goal and my dream is to as my
mom always said to me and my brothers
like be better than the L how are you
thinking about fatherhood
well I I go back and forth on
it because on on the one hand sometimes
I think you see it's like the zooming
the lens sometimes I think about like
the planet and the world I'm like oh you
bringing kids you going to bring kids
and then I'm like yeah but the world's
probably been terrible for everyone
who's been in it at every single given
time so is that a reason to not have a
child and then I asked myself the other
question I'm like okay but what do I
think I'm bringing to this child and
then I thought to myself oh do I want to
have a kid with ADHD how hard was that
for them and what is it going to be like
and and then I'm like ah but maybe it'll
be great because you know ADH and maybe
they'll have it and maybe they won't and
maybe like so I I go back and forth on
all of these things the you know the one
thing I I would
hope is that I will give my child two
things that are important and that is
number one being chosen number two being
considered you know I think a lot of
people have
children but they may not choose them
and they don't consider them you know
and that's where you'll hear parents and
saying things like you know I brought
you into this world it's like yeah
exactly so you should consider me a
little bit more you know many parents
treat children as if the children owe
them for introducing them into existence
when I think it's the other way around
so yeah I I I think to myself I I like
the idea of it and I do like the puzzle
of it um but just like I learned from
The Daily Show and every other major
undertaking uh if I know that that it's
going to be terrible then I'll probably
have a great time but if I think that
it's going to be rewarding and wonderful
I'm going to hate a lot of the moments
in it how does Romantica fit into all of
this for you because you're well you
were you know during those Daily Show
days working every hour of the day yeah
you were fighting in every sense of the
word to make this show a success you're
living in an apartment with a guy who
who's also doing the same I don't know
where it fits I can't see it it didn't
in many you know and that that was the
price I paid you know that does it fit
now yeah I think it definitely does I
think it definitely does like it's it's
a weird thing to say but as I've have
become more comfortable with the notion
that I could be not in a relationship
forever like you know as people say by
yourself but I don't think of that
because of friends and Community but as
I've gotten more comfortable with that I
think I've become more able to be in a
relationship because I I think more and
more I've thought of a relationship is
something I can bring value to as
opposed to the thing that's supposed to
just do everything for me mhm you know
and I think before I was only looking at
it that way without realizing
it's Trevor um these books are beautiful
for so many different
reasons borner crime is one of the most
um it's so funny because it's not my
story but it's everyone's story in so
many ways and I think that's why it's
such a beautiful book it's it's the
story of a guy who didn't feel like he F
fit in his relationship ship with his
mother his his love for his mother his
journey to the very very top of a
mountain um and all of the important
wisdom that he's learned along the way
um that that I think is so relatable
even though it's not not my story and
some books don't achieve that but your
books achieve that so well and this book
is the first time I've ever described a
book as being truly truly beautiful it
comes out on the 8th of October it's
called into the uncut grass and it's so
wise powerful but beautiful a book that
and silly I hope people remember that
it's silly I would love to read this to
my kids but I it's funny because I
thought when I first opened it and I
thought okay you know it's um there's
illustrations throughout the book and
then I started reading the words and you
realize that it's both both applicable
and Powerful to a young person but also
something you could have read alone at
my age of 32 it's such a beautiful book
and it follows in the tradition of the
the boy the fox in the mall
it's it's books that I loved you know
the boy the F The Little Prince you know
there's so many books like that that I
think ins spired me to think
about
rediscovering our
childlike um curiosity uh ability to to
to think Beyond ourselves our
imagination like almost like
re-remembering
yourself before many of the hurts you
know and then and then going from there
and so and connection is such a
prevalent theme throughout this the
Journey of connection of love and all of
those things and I'm going to link that
below so everyone needs to to read that
book it's so beautiful read it for
yourself read it for your kids um read
it with your partner we have a closing
tradition on this podcast where the last
guest leaves a question for the next
guest not knowing who they're going to
be leaving the question for wow okay
tell us about the lowest point of your
life how did you overcome it what
lessons did you learn from the
experience
h i funny enough I think we talked about
it I I I would safely say the lowest
point of my life was my mother being
shot so it's crazy that we did speak
about it um how did I overcome it I
don't think I would be so
um arrogant as to say that I have
overcome it I think I'm constantly
working to overcome it you do you ever
overcome these things I don't know to be
honest with you I really don't know
because I you know it's it's it's
strange because I don't know what that
means or doesn't mean does it mean You'
you don't think of it anymore does it
mean it doesn't affect you anymore I
don't know what the answer to that
question is you know maybe overcoming
something means that it no now no longer
negatively influences you or I I don't
know I don't think that we have like one
fixed idea of overcoming something that
isn't tangible you know it's not like
scaling a mountain so um the the honest
answer I would give is yeah I just I
just give myself Grace and I and I try
and work at it I I try and
understand
that it's all a work in progress you
know one of my one of my favorite things
I I learn learned recently and I guess
it speaks to this is um I should
remember the name I'm so I'm ter I
always remember stories and not like the
names of things or the dates but there's
a a beautiful art form um that I I
learned about when I was in Japan
recently and basically it's it's a
practice of repairing pottery and
ceramics that have
broken right and what happens is you
know you break a plate or you break a
like a vase or something and what they
do is they they put it back together
these Artisans who do it but they don't
just glue it back together they glue it
back together and they and they they
sort of Adorn it with like a golden
bondage and what what you get is an
object that is somehow more beautiful
than before it was
broken and it's this beautiful Japanese
tradition I'm sure you could find the
name and you know put it out there but
it's um if you could help me with it but
it's it's it's so
to me it was it was one of the the most
beautiful Concepts and a different way
to think about being quote unquote fixed
or overcoming or you know it is the uh
art of kin sui in
Japan and learning about this blew my
mind because it was such a it was a it
was a paradox shifting way for me to
think about
overcoming or being better and it it
wasn't the idea that we are perfect the
way we were before something happened to
us but rather it is that we get to wear
our cracks with a new type of Pride and
a new type of beauty you know and and
that's maybe how I think of overcoming
now is I think of myself like a ceramic
that has been cracked many times and
because of the love in my life and
because of you know great therapists and
because of good people and because I've
worked and I've managed to find ways to
put gold bondage in those cracks to
somehow find a little more Beauty in
myself than I had before the thing that
happened to me um and so yeah that's
that that like that Absol every time I
see those like it actually makes me
emotional when I look at each one and I
think about the story sort of of the
person that each vessel
contains my last question is a a very
complex question but it it was inspired
by what you just said about kugi the
Japanese tradition which is I spoke to a
guy called Mo G out my podcast who had
lost his son oh yeah I love Mo yeah I
love your conversation with him that
great it's one of my favorite of all
time because for many reasons but many
of them you you've touched on today and
he in that conversation he said
something to me about the loss of his
son he said there's this thing called
the Eraser test I don't know if you've
ever heard about it but they ask a group
of people who have been through a lot of
difficult experiences that if there was
a button yes um in front of them that
could would erase all of those
experiences really difficult experiences
at times would they press it now if I
put a button in front of you and it
would erase what had happened to your
mother being shot at that age um would
you press it yes I would you would yeah
I would and this is this is a
fundamental philosophical argument that
I have with people this is purely like
philosophy and it's the way I see the
world and I think the way some people
see the
world I
understand that many of the times or I
understand that like often times
people come out of a bad
experience with a new learning or
something that has improved them in many
ways but I think we should never take
for granted how many times that doesn't
happen you know I think we should never
take for granted how many people are
broken by a bad thing and I think we've
done something in society and maybe it's
because we want to valorize it or maybe
it's because we want to make people feel
like they're not victims or we want to
make it seem like there was some purpose
or meaning maybe it's tied to religion I
think think we at times have sort of
valorized this idea it happened to you
for a reason you know and so now you you
get this kid who was abused by their
parents or someone in their family and
you're like it happened to you for a
reason it made you the person you are
today you know or somebody who suffered
a horrible trauma or like a car accident
a terrorist attack a whatever it is hey
it happened to you for a reason you're
going to you know look at you you will
be stronger or look at you today
wouldn't be this person you know what
people forget to talk about is the fact
that yeah you could have been a
different version of you you could have
been happier you could have been less
wounded you could have carried less
burden you could have been less hurtful
because of that and I think we should
never take that for granted I think we
should encourage people to find the best
and we should we should always say to
ourselves hey what can I get from this
situation what can I learn from it how
can I grow from it but I am not a fan of
anybody saying
that they will keep it because it's made
them who they are just because you've
survived a storm doesn't mean that you
should want to keep that
storm you know and and so and that's why
I say it's a philosophical argument it
really is but I I don't like how we've
done that to people because in some way
I feel like it makes people think that
they now have to be grateful for a
terrible thing that has happened to them
or a terrible thing that they've
experienced or people around them have
experienced because because they've come
out more resilient on the other side of
it everything happens to you for a
reason yeah and so if I could replace it
I go no I forget that I don't go like
everything happens to you or doesn't I
go back to what I said my friend Phrase
My friend taught me who are who do you
choose to be I would say forget the
Eraser test I would say to you there can
never be an eraser test why don't we
replace it with a pencil test a pen test
a mark test whatever you know device you
want to use and you go if you could
press this button and decide what story
you write on the other side of the thing
that happened to you would you now write
that story and what story would you
write I think that's more important
because the Eraser thing makes people
now feel like they have to dis owner
part of themselves which most people
will not want to do but then it makes
you feel like you have to like claim
this thing as being part of yourself no
I would press that button I would erase
my mother being shot I would erase me uh
having ADHD I would erase uh the tough
times that my country went I erased a
partite I would I wouldn't be like I'll
would keep a partite Stephen because if
it wasn't for a partite I wouldn't be
here with you today no no no no no no I
would erase it and maybe we'd be dealing
with something else but if I could I I I
would press that button because I yeah I
I don't think we need to celebrate it I
think we need to work on it and you know
we need to strive to heal ourselves but
I don't think your tribulations are what
make you you survived and I'm proud of
you for surviving but that doesn't mean
that you needed to go through what you
had to go through so beautifully said
you have a wonderful podcast I could
talk to you all day but if people want
to hear more from you they have to go
and listen to your podcast um it's
called what now on Spotify um you speak
to a whole range of people like me but
you you do it in a very different way
but in the in the way and with the the
same set of components as to what's made
you such a hit with so many people I
can't tell you how much you know my team
than very you're very my my family my
sister my brothers they're such
tremendous fans of you because you have
this wonderful blend of WI I now know
where it all comes from humility
vulnerability and you
are authentic and authentic is a
complicated word but you are authentic
as anyone could hope to be um that's why
everyone has to go listen to your
podcast it's the third link that I'm
going to put down below it's called what
now um and it's one of my favorites
Trevor thank you so much from the guy
who made easily one of the best ever
thank you very much no no I mean this I
mean this for real you know I always say
like I go if you want to see a
professional podcast go go to Diary of a
CEO if want to come explore my mind come
listen to what now oh people want to
explore your mind fever and
it's no but for real I'm like
congratulations I appreciate you so much
and I can't tell you how much of an
honor this was sometimes I get quite
nervous to interview people and you're
one that I got nervous to because I
respect you so much so thank you so much
Trevor for the time I appreciate you
yeah man and don't don't spend as much
time alone you're not like you know I
know you've always been there and I know
it can feel in a weird way it can feel
like the comfortable place but like it
doesn't need to be
you'll be shocked at like how much lies
on the other side of it you know in a
weird way you you'll you'll be shocked
at what finding that belonging can do
for you you know it it comes with risk
the same way it does in a romantic
relationship but man it's it's it's
easily the most rewarding I if if
there's like a if I could evangelize one
thing to people out there it would be
find your people find your place and
unfortunately I think that's what's
happening these days people are finding
that place in negativity you know people
are finding community in negativity now
we all hate together we all we all you
know hate tweet together and we we're
all like angry at women together and we
all hate that music artist together and
we all yeah let's hate together but that
that's it's not sustainable because it
gobbles us up like it just like chews us
up and splits us out but if you can find
the things that you love doing for you
and then you find the people who love
doing it as well and it makes you feel
good the thing on the other side is It's
Magic in fact they shown studies I know
you love studies studies multiple
Studies have shown and I think a meta
analysis as well has shown that people
who have a strong group of friends
actually have better romantic
relationships because the burden of your
relationship is now lessened by having
this community as opposed to people who
merge with one person and then all their
hopes aspirations dreams fears
frustrations are just poured on them you
reach a breaking point but you can
actually have it's not replacing it by
the way you have a better romantic
relationship when you maintain and you
have a strong friendship so I I
encourage it do it I promise you I will
do it let you it's going to be great
thank you CH thank you man thank you so
much so much I really appreciate it
thank you
[Music]
a